U.N. ambassador calls recent terrorism an attack on the world
University Wire
October 8, 2001


Copyright 2001 The Pitt News via U-Wire
Length: 548 words
Byline: By Katie Leonard, The Pitt News
Dateline: Pittsburgh
Body


United Nations Ambassador Jargalsaikhany Enkhsaikhan of Mongolia visited the University of Pittsburgh last week, bringing with him a Mongolian perspective of the Sept. 11 terrorist attacks and the effects of globalization.
"We believe this act is an attack not only against New York or Washington or the U.S., but it is an attack on the world community at large," said Enkhsaikhan, referring to the United Nations' formal response on Sept. 12.
Since the attacks, the United Nations passed several resolutions allowing the United States and other members to take action against terrorism within 90 days. These resolutions instruct member states on how to fight terrorism and what measures they should take along with explaining what different world organizations' roles should be.
U. Pittsburgh
The resolution also enacted chapter seven of the United Nations' charter, which "empowers the Security Council and member states to take decisive actions." These actions include embargoes or blockades, but if they fall short the Council can then call for the use of force.
"Hopefully, within 90 days the member states will be able to take decisive action to close all the routes and possibilities for terrorists to continue their illegal operations," he said.
As of now, there has been no disagreement on the course of action within the United Nations, including none from member state Iraq. But Enkhsaikhan said that this could change.
In the past, the United Nations tried to take action against Osama bin Laden and his followers, but the missions have failed.
In 1999 the United Nations demanded that bin Laden be turned over to proper authorities, and in 2000 the group called for the Taliban "to act swiftly to close down all training camps."
The fact that the United Nations does not officially recognize the Taliban and that there was "no direct evidence leading to bin Laden" in the previous attacks, makes these resolutions more difficult to see through.
Enkhsaikhan also took part in a panel discussion during his visit concerning the effects of globalization on less-developed countries such as Mongolia.
Joining him on this panel was a former Mongolian government official, Bat Erdene; Betsy Nettelbeck, who served the Peace Corps in Mongolia for the last two years; and Seth Spalding, a former Pitt professor.
Enkhsaikhan discussed the challenges faced by Mongolia as a landlocked nation surrounded by China and Russia. Its economy has suffered from the costs of transportation through the two bordering nations.
According to Enkhsaikhan, "We're spending 3.4 times as much more [for transportation] than for the national defense."
Mongolia is in what he described as a state of transition, going through various economic and political changes.
The panel discussed several possible solutions to promoting Mongolia's economy.
Improving the travel industry was one of the solutions offered.
"Especially with young people, independent travelers have increased tremendously," Nettelbeck said.
The panel saw globalization as a potential threat to the culture of Mongolia.
"Mongolians have their own culture, and if we lose out on it there will be no difference between Mongolians, Russians and Chinese," Enkhsaikhan said.
(C) 2001 The Pitt News via U-WIRE

Load-Date: October 8, 2001


End of Document