U.N. Urged to Press Libya On Suspects in 2 Bombings
The New York Times
January 11, 1992, Saturday, Late Edition - Final


Copyright 1992 The New York Times Company
Distribution: Foreign Desk
Section: Section 1;; Section 1; Page 3; Column 5; Foreign Desk; Column 5;
Length: 681 words
Byline: By PAUL LEWIS,

By PAUL LEWIS,  Special to The New York Times
Dateline: UNITED NATIONS, Jan. 10
Body


The United States, France and Britain today circulated a draft resolution asking the world to press Libya to hand over for trial agents accused of blowing up two passenger airliners and to pay compensation for those terrorist acts.
In what is likely to prove a difficult political operation, the three countries want the Security Council to approve a text that "strongly deplores the fact that Libya has not yet responded effectively" to requests made in connection with the blowing up of Pan Am Flight 103 over Lockerbie, Scotland, in December 1988 and the destruction of a French Union de Transports Aeriens airliner over the Sahara in September 1989.
The attack on the American plane killed 270 people, while 170 lives were lost when U.T.A. Flight 772 went down.
This is believed to be the first time the Security Council has ever been asked to call for the extradition of the citizens of one country to stand trial in another and give implicit support to accusations of state-sponsored terrorism against a member Government of the United Nations.
 
Extradition Goes Unmentioned
 Although Libya has offered to try the accused officials itself or hand them over to some international tribunal for judgment, the United States and Britain have rejected that in the case of the two agents they accuse of blowing up the Pan Am flight.
They argue that no competent international tribunal exists to try the accused and that the Libyan Government cannot be expected to prosecute vigorously the agents it ordered to carry out the deed.
Although France has issued arrest warrants for those responsible for destroying the U.T.A. flight and wants compensation, it has not yet formally demanded their extradition.
The draft resolution, which begins by recalling Council resolutions dating back to 1970 that condemn interferance with civilian air traffic, never mentions the word extradition. Instead, it simply "urges the Libyan Government immediately to provide a full and effective response" to the American, British and French demands "so as to contribute to the elimination of international terrorism."
 
Proposed Sanctions
 It also urges "all states individually and collectively to encourage the Libyan Government to respond fully and effectively" to those requests.
The United States, France and Britain are drawing up plans for a second resolution imposing trade sanctions on Libya if it does not cooperate.
Diplomats from those countries say such sanctions would probably take the form of a mandatory suspension of all civilian air links with Libya and a ban on selling it aircraft and spare parts.
The draft resolution the three presented today raises delicate issues, particularly for the Security Council's third-world members who are traditionally eager to prevent the United States from using the United Nations to influence what they consider the internal affairs of sovereign states.
Nevertheless, although the proposed new resolution is one of the most intrusive ever presented to the Council, representatives of the three sponsoring countries said they think it will pass next week.
 
Letter From Libya
 Far more difficult, they say, would be the task of persuading the Council to, in effect, accept the accusations they have made against Libya by agreeing to impose mandatory trade sanctions if it does not comply with their initial demands.
Libya has now demanded a special meeting of the General Assembly to identify and eliminate the causes of international terrorism.
In a rambling letter from the Peoples Committee for Foreign Liaison and International Cooperation, Libya suggested several steps it said could lead to the elimination of terrorism.
Those include the banning and destruction of all nuclear, chemical and biological weapons and all ballistic missiles. It said naval fleets should be confined to oceans and banned from the Mediterranean and other seas.
It called for the former colonial powers to pay compensation to colonized peoples. And it suggested rewriting the United Nations Charter to remove the Security Council's decision-making powers and give them to the General Assembly.

Load-Date: January 11, 1992


End of Document