U.N. chief urges new antiterrorism treaty;
The world needs a universal definition, Kofi Annan said - and a collective response to the threat.
 The Philadelphia Inquirer
MARCH 11, 2005 Friday CITY-D EDITION


Copyright 2005 Philadelphia Newspapers, LLC  All Rights Reserved


Section: NATIONAL; Pg. A10
Length: 527 words
Byline: Ed McCullough ASSOCIATED PRESS
Dateline: MADRID, Spain
Body


U.N. Secretary-General Kofi Annan yesterday called for a world treaty on terrorism that would outlaw attacks targeting civilians and establish a framework for a collective response to the global threat.
Although the United Nations and its agencies have 12 treaties covering terrorism, a universal definition has been elusive.
World leaders and officials have had deep disagreements over whether resisters to alleged oppression - for example, Palestinian suicide bombers attacking Israeli targets - are terrorists or freedom fighters, and whether states that use what they think is legitimate force might be branded terrorists.
Annan was categorical yesterday in his address to terrorism experts and world leaders from 50 countries, including Attorney General Alberto Gonzales, Spanish Prime Minister Jose Luis Rodriguez Zapatero, and Afghan President Hamid Karzai.
"The right to resist occupation . . . cannot include the right to deliberately kill or maim civilians," Annan told the conference on democracy, terrorism and security. The United Nations, he said, must proclaim "loud and clear that terrorism can never be accepted or justified in any cause whatsoever."
Gonzales pledged to work closely with Europe to strengthen a collective effort against terrorism.
"The fight against terrorism is, in the end, a struggle over values," the attorney general said in remarks that stressed the close cooperation between Europe and the United States since the Sept. 11, 2001, attacks.
"Freedom, not terror, will triumph," Gonzales said. "We will not be divided. And we, not they, will know victory."
Annan stressed that no country was exempt from attack and that the way forward was coordinated action by like-minded governments, which he said must reject brutal tactics.
"Perhaps the thing that is most vital we deny to terrorists is access to nuclear materials," Annan said. "Nuclear terrorism is still often treated as science fiction. I wish it were.. . .
"Were such an attack to occur," he said, "it would not only cause widespread death and destruction but would stagger the world economy and thrust tens of millions of people into dire poverty." He said preventing that would justify the use of force.
Annan said multinational police, legal and diplomatic work was the best strategy: for example, pinpointing and thwarting violent groups and their activities, and blocking the travel and financial and other means to carry out attacks.
He said the world body needed a 13th treaty to define terrorism, stigmatize it, and prepare a framework for governments to work together to curtail it.
"Now the time has come to complete a comprehensive convention outlawing terrorism in all its forms," he said.
Annan's remarks closely track the recommendations made by the approximately 180 academics, police and intelligence officials, legislators, and other experts on terrorism who participated in the Club de Madrid's program during the last six months, culminating in the four-day conference in Madrid.
The city and the date for the summit were chosen to commemorate the victims of the train bombings March 11, 2004, that killed 191 passengers and bystanders and wounded more than 1,500.

Load-Date: September 8, 2005


End of Document