U.N. ASSEMBLY ASSAILS TERRORISM
The New York Times
December 7, 1985, Saturday, Late City Final Edition


Copyright 1985 The New York Times Company
Section: Section 1; Page 3, Column 3; Foreign Desk
Length: 344 words
Byline: Special to the New York Times
Dateline: UNITED NATIONS, N.Y., Dec. 6
Body


The United Nations General Assembly voted overwhelmingly today to condemn all acts of international terrorism as ''criminal.''
It was the first time that a resolution dealing with terrorism had ever been passed by the Assembly.
The vote was 118 to 1, with Cuba voting against the resolution. Israel and Burkina Faso, the former Upper Volta, abstained. Iran was among the 37 nations that did not take part in the vote.
The Warsaw Pact countries, Nicaragua and hard-line Arab nations supported the resolution, even though they had expressed regret that it did not specifically condemn ''state terrorism,'' a phrase used in United Nations debates to describe American support of the Nicaraguan rebels and Israeli raids in Arab territory.
The compromise resolution, adopted by the Assembly's legal committee, ''unequivocally condemns, as criminal, all acts, methods and practices of terrorism wherever and by whomever committed, including those which jeopardize friendly relations among states and their security.'' It also ''deplores'' the killing of innocent people as a result of terrorism as well as the impact of acts of international terrorism on cooperation among nations.
The resolution calls on ''all states to fulfill their obligations under international law to refrain from organizing, instigating, assisting or participating in terrorist acts in other states, or acquiescing in activities within their territory'' toward such acts. ----Rights Resolutions Adopted UNITED NATIONS, N.Y., Dec. 6 -The United Nations tonight passed resolutions expressing concern for human rights violations in Afghanistan, Iran, Chile, Guatemala and El Salvador. A General Assembly committee approved the resolutions, with the United States abstaining from the resolutions on El Salvador and Guatemala and voting against the Chilean resolution. Patricia M. Byrne, a United States delegate, said that, while human rights violations occur in Chile, the resolution did not recognize ''positive developments'' there. Approval by the full Assembly of the committee's actions is routine.


End of Document