U.N. DECRIES TERRORIST ATTACKS RECENT BOMBINGS WERE CONDEMNED. ISRAEL REGRETTED THE STATEMENT FAILED TO SAY THE TARGETS WERE JEWISH.
 The Philadelphia Inquirer
July 30, 1994 Saturday FINAL EDITION


Copyright 1994 Philadelphia Newspapers, LLC  All Rights Reserved


Section: NATIONAL; Pg. A13
Length: 408 words
Byline: Anthony Goodman, REUTERS
Dateline: UNITED NATIONS
Body


The Security Council issued a statement yesterday condemning recent "terrorist attacks" in Buenos Aires and London and stressing the need to strengthen international cooperation to "eliminate all forms of terrorism."
Israel's U.N. envoy expressed regret that references to the targets as being Jewish or Israeli facilities had been deleted from the text at the prompting of some council members.
The statement was read to reporters by council President Jamsheed Marker of Pakistan after a closed-door briefing by Argentine Foreign Minister Guido Di Tella on the car bombing of the main Jewish community center in Buenos Aires earlier this month in which at least 96 people were killed and more than 200 wounded.
A total of 19 people were injured in London this week when the Israeli Embassy was bombed Tuesday and a building housing Jewish organizations was targeted early Wednesday.
Asked whether any conclusions had been reached regarding responsibility for the Buenos Aires bombing, Di Tella told reporters: "The answer is no. We are pressed to jump to conclusions, to interrupt the procedures of the judicial process, to condemn countries that might be involved. . . . We will not do that."
He proposed the establishment of a special U.N. unit to coordinate action against terrorism, similar to one now dealing with illicit drug trafficking.
Israel's ambassador to the United Nations, Gad Yaacobi, thanked the Argentine government and its foreign minister for their cooperation in the investigation into the bombing in the Argentine capital, where the Israeli Embassy was also demolished by a car bomb in 1992 with the loss of 29 lives.
Yaacobi said it was important that the Security Council had called for "international cooperation against terrorist activities" and stressed that Israel would not be deterred from the Middle East peace process.
But he expressed disappointment that, "following the opposition of some of the members of the Security Council," references to the recent attacks as being directed against Jewish and Israeli facilities had been dropped from the council statement.
"This general language is an escape of those who are not ready to fight aggressively against this international threat to stability and peace," he said.
Israel has accused Iran of involvement in the recent spate of bombings, but Yaacobi on this occasion did not mention any country by name, referring only to "this international network of terror activities."

Load-Date: October 21, 2002


End of Document