U.N. summit takes first step toward tackling major issues;
As its meeting ended, world leaders avoided a tougher plan and chose a more general one.
 Philadelphia Inquirer
September 17, 2005 Saturday CITY-D EDITION


Copyright 2005 Philadelphia Newspapers, LLC  All Rights Reserved


Section: NATIONAL; Pg. A03
Length: 544 words
Byline: By Edith M. Lederer; Associated Press
Dateline: UNITED NATIONS
Body


History's largest gathering of world leaders fell far short yesterday of completing the major changes U.N. Secretary-General Kofi Annan sought to fight poverty, terrorism and human-rights abuses - but the leaders took a first step.
At the end of a three-day summit, the leaders adopted a 35-page document by consensus and then burst into applause.
The document commits governments to achieving U.N. goals to combat poverty and creates a commission to help move countries from war to peace.
President Bush, who two years ago questioned whether the United Nations was relevant, surprised many by giving the world body his strong backing. He also won praise for declaring that poverty breeds terrorism and despair and challenging world leaders to abolish all trade tariffs and subsidies to promote prosperity and opportunity in struggling nations.
The three-day summit, which ended yesterday, brought presidents, prime ministers and kings from 151 of the 191 member states to the United Nations - a record number according to U.N. officials. Leaders from the most powerful nations hobnobbed with those from tiny Pacific island states such as Tuvalu, and the key phrase was one-on-one "face time."
Instead of adopting Annan's sweeping blueprint to enable the world body to deal with the challenges of a new century, they were presented with a diluted 35-page document. The final document represented the lowest common denominator that all countries could agree on after months of negotiations, and even then Cuba and Venezuela expressed reservations.
Greek President Kostas Karamanlis said the United Nations, built for the post-World War II era, "has to adapt in order to be effective in the new international environment."
"The United Nations, the only truly global institution of humanity, endowed with a unique legitimacy, must respond to the new realities and challenges," he said.
But Australian Prime Minister John Howard said, "We should not think that the United Nations can solve all the world's problems, nor that it should attempt to do so."
Annan, speaking in an interview that the BBC aired yesterday, rejected suggestions that the United Nations was trying to act as a world government.
"I hope the U.N. will not be seen as a world government," he said. "If I give the impression we are a world government, we'll get even more critics and our critics will be emboldened."
Annan said the summit would make an "important advance" despite the dilution of key elements of the U.N. reform plan he presented in March.
The most significant planks in the final document are the creation of a new Peacebuilding Commission to help countries emerging from conflict and an acceptance by all governments of the collective international responsibility to protect people from genocide, war crimes and ethnic cleansing.
For the first time, the declaration condemns terrorism "in all its forms and manifestations, committed by whomever, wherever and for whatever purposes," but it skirts the contentious issue of defining terrorism because of objections that independence struggles would be targeted.
It agrees to establish a Human Rights Council to replace the Human Rights Commission, which has been widely criticized for becoming politicized and having rights abusers among its members.

Load-Date: September 22, 2005


End of Document