U.N. slaps sanctions on Afghanistan;
 Anti-U.S. protests flare in standoff over terrorism suspect.
The Atlanta Journal and Constitution
November 15, 1999, Monday,
Home Edition


Copyright 1999 The Atlanta Constitution
Section: News; Pg. 1A
Length: 307 words
Byline: Amir Shah, Associated Press
Dateline: Kabul, Afghanistan
Body

The United Nations imposed sanctions Sunday on Afghanistan for refusing to hand over suspected terrorist Osama bin Laden, prompting thousands of protesters shouting ''Death to America'' to take to the streets of Kabul and stone the empty U.S. Embassy.
The sanctions took effect at midnight EST despite last-minute pleas from the ruling Taliban army.
CONSTITUTIONThey are intended to pressure the Taliban to deliver the Saudi exile to the United States or a third country to stand trial on terrorism charges.
Protesters swarmed into the streets of the Afghan capital, burning U.S. flags and shouting anti-American slogans. They accused the U.N. of being a ''puppet'' of the United States.
The protesters, many wearing traditional turbans, baggy pants and long shirts, tried to storm a World Food Program office, but they were stopped by Taliban soldiers, who fired automatic rifles into the air.
In a statement Saturday, the Taliban Foreign Ministry said it was ready for talks with the United States. Washington repeatedly has rejected Taliban offers of talks or alternatives to surrendering bin Laden.
The U.N. sanctions order all states to freeze the Taliban's overseas assets and ban flights owned, leased or operated by the Taliban from taking off or landing. An exemption to the flight ban would be permitted for humanitarian reasons or to allow the Islamic pilgrimage to Mecca.
The sanctions are more modest than those imposed by Washington this year. Those banned U.S. trade and investment with the Taliban, barred Americans from using the Taliban-run Ariana Afghan Airlines and paved the way for seizure of the airline's $ 500 million in U.S. assets.
The Taliban have refused to hand over bin Laden, saying they have no extradition treaty with the United States and that Afghan tradition makes it impossible to turn a guest over to his enemies.

Load-Date: November 15, 1999


End of Document