U.N. TERROR COMMITTEE FINDS NO LINK BETWEEN IRAQ, AL-QAIDA
St. Louis Post-Dispatch (Missouri)
June 27, 2003 Friday Five Star Edition


Copyright 2003 St. Louis Post-Dispatch, Inc.
Section: NEWS; Pg. A2
Length: 284 words
Byline: The Associated Press
Dateline: UNITED NATIONS
Body


The U.N. terrorism committee has found no evidence linking Iraq to al-Qaida and did not investigate claims by President George W. Bush's administration of such ties, officials said Thursday.
The terrorism committee has just completed a draft report charting efforts by countries to track and shut down Osama bin Laden's operations.
The report notes success in the war on terrorism stemming from the arrests of some top al-Qaida figures.
But it also notes the group has been able to reconstitute support and benefit from loopholes to continue acts of terrorism worldwide.
Nowhere in the 42-page draft is there any mention of Iraq or claims that it served as a safe haven for al-Qaida.
The committee first heard of alleged ties during Secretary of State Colin Powell's February presentation to the Security Council.
"It had never come to our knowledge before Powell's speech and we never received any information from the United States for us to even follow-up on," said Abaza Hassan, a committee investigator.
U.S. diplomats said Powell had laid out all the evidence to the council.
"We know that Iraq provided some training to al-Qaida in chemical weapons development, and we also know there were clear contacts between them that can be documented," said Richard Grenell, spokesman for the U.S. mission here.
Powell insisted in his presentation that Saddam Hussein's government was allowing a senior al-Qaida member named Abu Musab Zarqawi to operate from Baghdad. Zarqawi has been indicted in the murder of a U.S. diplomat in Jordan on Oct. 28.
The alleged connections were cited by the administration as one of the key reasons for going after Saddam.
But the committee saw no need to investigate Zarqawi's movements.

Notes

PAGE 2

Load-Date: June 28, 2003


End of Document