U.N. affirms role in fight against terrorism;
Secretary-General Annan called for nations to band together. He was immediately backed by the U.S. and Russia.
 The Philadelphia Inquirer
SEPTEMBER 25, 2001 Tuesday CITY-D EDITION


Copyright 2001 Philadelphia Newspapers, LLC  All Rights Reserved


Section: NATIONAL; Pg. A14
Length: 622 words
Byline: Edith M. Lederer ASSOCIATED PRESS
Dateline: UNITED NATIONS
Body


The United States and Russia gave immediate support to Secretary-General Kofi Annan's call yesterday for the United Nations to play a major role in the long-term international fight against terrorism, but there was no clear agreement yet on what the world body can and should do.
Addressing a scaled-down meeting of the General Assembly, Annan declared that only the United Nations could give "global legitimacy" to the struggle against "the unspeakable horror" of terrorism. He urged all countries to work together to strengthen international peace and security "by cementing the ties among nations, and not subjecting them to new strains."
Only hours after he spoke, the U.S. House of Representatives voted to speed $582 million in back dues to the United Nations. The measure, approved by voice vote, had passed the Senate 99-0 on Feb. 7.
"Meeting our financial obligations to the United Nations will help to ensure that our policymakers can keep the focus on broad policies that unite the members of the Security Council in the fight against global terrorism," said Rep. Henry J. Hyde (R., Ill.), chairman of the House International Relations Committee.
The United States promised in a 1999 law that it would pay $926 million in back dues on the condition that the United Nations reform its huge bureaucracy and cut the financial burden of the United States. The money has been set aside, but thus far, only $100 million has been sent.
Last week, the General Assembly postponed its annual gathering of global leaders because of security concerns following the Sept. 11 terrorist attacks on New York and the Pentagon. Nonetheless, the 189 nations in the world body are going ahead with their work program at a lower level.
Yesterday, in somber tones, Annan told diplomats in the hushed General Assembly chamber that the attacks struck at everything the United Nations stood for: "peace, freedom, tolerance, human rights, the very idea of a united family."
Backing Annan, Russian Foreign Minister Igor Ivanov told the General Assembly that the United Nations should lead any global action against terrorism and warned against moves that could erode international law.
"It is necessary to strengthen and enhance the role of the United Nations as an indispensable instrument for maintaining international peace and security and for mobilizing people of the world against new, unprecedented threats," he said.
Cameron Hume, the third-ranking U.S. diplomat, said the United Nations has "a new and overarching challenge," which must be met by a global response. He added: "This is a crucial moment for the United Nations. It has a chance to live up to the ideals on which it was founded."
The new U.S. ambassador, John Negroponte, who presented his credentials last week, had been scheduled to make his first speech but sent Hume instead. U.S. officials had no immediate comment.
The secretary-general did not address specific measures, but last week he said U.N. member states must stop providing shelter and support for terrorists, halt the laundering of money used to finance terrorist acts, and share information on terrorists and their organizations.
Annan said yesterday he expected the General Assembly at its Oct. 1 plenary meeting on international terrorism to urge all nations to ratify and implement a dozen legally binding conventions and protocols to fight terrorism - and to consider new ones.
Hume said the United States hoped the meeting "will promote unity of purpose and strong steps that the U.N. can take to combat terror."
"These efforts will also require absolute clarity that the international community condemns and rejects any effort to offer false justification for the attack or to protect those who committed it," he said.

Graphic

 
PHOTO;
Kofi Annan: The attacks struck "the idea of a united family."

Load-Date: October 31, 2001


End of Document