U.N. Condemns Kabul Terror Attacks
RTT News (United States)
February 12, 2009 Thursday


Copyright 2009 NoticiasFinancieras/Grupo de Diarios America All Rights Reserved
Length: 321 words
Body


(RTTNews) - The United Nations has strongly condemned the suicide attacks in Kabul by Taliban militants, who killed more than 26 persons, and called for stringent punishment for the perpetrators of the dastardly act, media reports said.
Secretary-General Ban Ki-moon said, he was outraged by the attacks against persons and institutions that are committed to building a better future for Afghanistan.
"This horrendous crime was committed against innocent civilians with total disrespect for human life and dignity. The U.N. stands shoulder to shoulder with the Afghans and Government in condemning Wednesday&apos;s attacks," he added.
The Security Council Wednesday underlined the need to bring "the perpetrators, organizers, financiers and sponsors of these reprehensible acts of terrorism" to justice.
The 15-member body reiterated its determination to combat all forms of terrorism, asserting, "no terrorist act can reverse the path towards peace, democracy and reconstruction in Afghanistan, which is supported by the people and the Government of Afghanistan and the international community."
Council president for February, Ambassador Yukio Takasu of Japan, said the members of the Security Council expressed concern at the threats posed by the Taliban, Al-Qaida, and other groups, to the local population, national security forces, international military and international assistance efforts in Afghanistan.
Ban&apos;s Special Representative to Afghanistan, Kai Eide, who is also head of the U.N. Assistance Mission in Afghanistan (UNAMA) highlighted the fact that the attacks targeted those working to build a better Afghanistan.
The civil servants who were killed and wounded were serving the people of Afghanistan. Other civilians have also lost their lives. His thoughts are with their families, he added.
For comments and feedback: contact editorial@rttnews.com
Copyright(c) 2009 RealTimeTraders.com, Inc. All Rights Reserved

Load-Date: April 16, 2010


End of Document