U.N. WORKING OUT A RESOLUTION ON LESOTHO RAID
The New York Times
December 15, 1982, Wednesday, Late City Final Edition


Copyright 1982 The New York Times Company
Section: Section A; Page 6, Column 1; Foreign Desk
Length: 644 words
Byline: By BERNARD D. NOSSITER, Special to the New York Times
Dateline: UNITED NATIONS, N.Y., Dec. 14
Body


The Security Council began drafting a resolution today to condemn South Africa for its raid last week on Lesotho.
King Moshoeshoe II, ruler of the landlocked nation, which is surrounded by South Africa, appealed tonight to the Council to restrain South Africa from ''pursuing a strategy of naked terrorism against a whole subcontinent.''
The King, 44 years old, said his country had been subjected to ''a murderous attack'' because it grants asylum to political refugees from Pretoria's rule. ''A completely unacceptable demand'' has been made on Lesotho to abandon this policy, he said.
UNITED NATIONS, N.Y., Dec. 14 -The Security Council began drafting a resolution today to condemn South Africa for its raid last week on Lesotho.
He appealed to the Council members ''who have influence over the rulers in Pretoria to exert pressure on South Africa to desist from its present policies of wholesale destruction and terrorism.''
African diplomats said the King was seeking a gesture of political support, but a resolution that would not punish South Africa with a cutoff of trade. Lesotho's economy is too heavily dependent on Pretoria for firmer action.
In a predawn raid last Thursday, South Africa sent five helicopters to Maseru, Lesotho's capital. The force attacked residences and killed 42 people. Pretoria said it was striking at members of the outlawed African National Congress, the principal resistance movement to the white-dominated Government.
 
Pretoria Cites Sabotage Plans
South African diplomats at the United Nations contend that their Government had learned that some of the people they attacked had planned to embark on sabotage and terrorist raids across the border.  Officials in Lesotho described the victims as refugees and insisted that their country banned terrorists.
The Security Council is not expected to adopt a resolution until later in the week, and negotiations were under way today over how strong a text would be acceptable. The six third-world members initially drafted stern language that could open the way for a trade boycott against Pretoria.
The key section ''strongly condemns South Africa for its act of unprovoked and premeditated aggression against Lesotho.'' The use of the word ''aggression'' is critical. Aggression is outlawed by the United Nations Charter, which provides for sanctions against those who commit it.
The United States, Britain and France have approved an embargo on the sale of arms to South Africa but until now have opposed any other boycott. Western diplomats said Washington and London were attempting to eliminate ''aggression'' from the text to insure that the sanctions question could not be raised. In addition, the United States was said to want to delete the word ''unprovoked,'' arguing that it was a one-sided judgment of the attack.
A tentative compromise was reached later in the day. The critical section now ''strongly condemns'' South Africa's ''aggressive act.'' By limiting the denunciation to a specific act, diplomats said, Pretoria will be better protected from any attempt to call for sanctions.
 
Awkward Position for Lesotho
Lesotho, where genuine power lies with the Prime Minister, Leabua Jonathan, is in an awkward position. On the one hand it wants the Council to adopt tough words, but it cannot afford any suggestion that it break off trade with South Africa. As many as one-quarter of Lesotho's workers cross its western frontier to work on the farms and in the gold mines of the Orange Free State, a South African province. In addition, the bulk of Lesotho's trade is with Pretoria.
Moreover, as African diplomats conceded, a Council resolution without the support of the United States and Britain would carry little weight in South Africa. Hence Lesotho, which comes to the Council as a victim, finds itself on the same side of nations seeking to soften condemnation of the aggressor.


End of Document