U.N. Council Votes To Condemn Killing Of Top P.L.O. Aide
The New York Times
April 26, 1988, Tuesday, Late City Final Edition


Copyright 1988 The New York Times Company
Section: Section A; Page 16, Column 2; Foreign Desk
Length: 424 words
Byline: Special to the New York Times
Dateline: UNITED NATIONS, April 25
Body


The Security Council adopted a resolution today condemning the assassination of a top Palestine Liberation Organization official in Tunis and noting that Tunisia has accused Israel of the murder.
The vote was 14 to 0. The United States, the Council's 15th member, abstained.
The resolution does not explicitly condemn Israel for the execution of the P.L.O. official, Abu Jihad, for fear the United States or Britain would veto it, diplomats said. But diplomats on the Council said the text was written to condemn Israel implicitly. The text stated that in adopting the resolution, the Council recalled that it condemned Israel in October 1985 for a raid against P.L.O. headquarters in Tunis.
 
Nations Supporting Measure
The 14 members supporting the resolution are West Germany, Italy, Japan, Zambia, Argentina, Algeria, Yugoslavia, Brazil, Nepal, Senegal, France, the Soviet Union, Britain and China.
The American delegate, Herbert S. Okun, condemned the assassination but said the United States decided to abstain because the text ''disproportionately places all blame for this rising spiral of violence in the Middle East on one event only, while failing to mention others that preceded it.''
While the resolution does not charge Israel with the killing, scores of speakers in the four-day debate did. Dozens of Arab and other delegates accused Israel of state terrorism, aggression and disregard for international law in killing Abu Jihad.
Israel refused to take part in the debate. But an Israeli diplomat expressed bitterness that the Council could implicitly condemn Israel without any evidence. The diplomat said not one of the speakers mentioned several terrorist acts Israel says were organized by Abu Jihad, such as the 1978 hijacking of an Israeli commuter bus in which 35 Israelis were killed.
 
Sympathy for Tunisia
The British delegate, Sir Crispin Tickell, called the killing a ''senseless act of terrorism'' and said ''the Government and people of Tunisia deserve the sympathy of the international community for an outrage committed on Tunisian soil.''
The Soviet chief delegate, Aleksandr M. Belonogov, said the ''latest terrorist act by Israel'' reflects official Israeli policy. He accused Israel of carrying out a ''wave of terrorism'' and a ''pogrom'' against Palestinians in the occupied West Bank.
The American abstention and the favorable vote by other Western countries took some diplomats by surprise. The Council postponed a vote Friday to let several delegations check with their foreign ministries for instructions, diplomats said.


End of Document