U.S. LEADERS VOW TO FIGHT TERRORISM; BUT SOME WARN OF OVERREACTION
St. Louis Post-Dispatch (Missouri)
July 30, 1996, Tuesday, FIVE STAR LIFT Edition


Copyright 1996 St. Louis Post-Dispatch, Inc.
Section: NEWS; Pg. 4A
Length: 615 words
Byline: Philip Dine Post-Dispatch Washington Bureau
Dateline: WASHINGTON
Body


President Bill Clinton and Republican leaders vowed to work together to enact far-reaching measures to fight domestic terrorism, but their meeting at the White House failed to produce an agreement on the specifics.
Republican and Democratic congressional leaders left a White House meeting Monday afternoon and said they will give Clinton most of what he wants in terms of new wiretapping power and other provisions.
Among items discussed with congressional leaders and law-enforcement officials were expanded wiretapping authority for the FBI and chemical tagging of explosives.
"We need to move, and we need to move this week, and we need to get something done to prevent terrorist acts in our country," said Rep. Richard Gephardt, D-Mo.
Saturday's Olympic bombing occurred in an atmosphere already charged by the crash of Trans World Airlines Flight 800 off Long Island nearly two weeks ago.
But even as the mood appeared to favor measures rejected after the Oklahoma City bombing last year, some observers warned of an overreaction.
"The FBI has always asked for more power," said Gregory Nojeim, legislative counsel in Washington for the American Civil Liberties Union.
"Our problem is the powers they're asking for would infringe on people's freedoms, by interception of innocent conversations.
"The government is already conducting wiretapping at record levels, with record levels of innocent conversations being intercepted," Nojeim said.
"Already four-fifths of all the conversations intercepted by law enforcement are innocent. Twenty years ago, it was only half."
At the same time the "efficiency rate" of wiretaps has fallen to 20 percent from 50 percent, the number of federal wiretaps has more than tripled, he said.
The ACLU also opposes providing phone records without a legal showing of criminality and opposes emergency wiretaps, as too easy to abuse.
"I think we can do most of the things the president asked us to do . . . this week," said Sen. Orrin Hatch, R-Utah.
"We're going to see more of this, not less, so we're trying to give the FBI the tools it needs," said Sen. Joseph Biden, D-Del. "I think it's time to stop talking."
Biden predicted Clinton would get 70 percent of what he asked for, with some compromises on wiretaps.
Other items discussed at the White House included making telephone records more easily accessible to investigators, applying anti-racketeering laws to terrorism and extending the statute of limitations for firearms violations.
Hatch said he'd like to hold off on the labeling of explosives by "taggants" - tiny bits of plastic or other substances mixed with the powder to help investigators track down where it came from. The controversial nature of the proposal could slow down the anti-terrorism measure, Hatch said.
Tom Wyld of the National Rifle Association said the taggants can cause some types of gunpowder to explode prematurely.
Sen. Paul Simon, D-Ill., though not at the White House meeting, said the main focus should be on investigating acts of terrorism and on giving law-enforcement agencies more resources where needed, but that "we need to be careful not to overreact with new laws that unduly restrict liberty."
Sen. Christopher Bond, R-Mo., noted that Congress passed an anti-terrorism bill last spring that expanded FBI powers.
"Before we expand them even further, as the president has suggested, we should step back and evaluate how they've used the new powers they've been granted."
Gephardt said: "The facts have changed. People are going to the Olympic Games and getting blown up.
We're not going to infringe on people's rights. There's always a balance you have to draw, but we're in a world of terrorism on the banks of the United States."

Graphic

 
PHOTO; Photo by AP - President Bill Clinton with Speaker Newt Gingrich (left) and Senate Majority Leader Trent Lott Monday at the White House.

Load-Date: July 31, 1996


End of Document