U.S. Supreme Court upholds anti-terror law
Telegraph Herald (Dubuque, IA)
June 22, 2010 Tuesday


Copyright 2010 Woodward Communications, Inc. All Rights Reserved
Section: A; Pg. 5
Length: 369 words
Byline: Mark Sherman The Associated Press
Body


WASHINGTON - The Supreme Court has upheld the government's authority to ban aid to designated terrorist groups, even when it is intended to steer the groups toward peaceful and legal activities. The court left intact a federal law that the Obama administration considers an important tool against terrorism Monday. But human rights organizations say the law's ban on providing training and advice to nearly four dozen organizations on a State Department list squanders a chance to persuade people to renounce extremism. 
The justices voted 6-3 to reject a free-speech challenge from humanitarian aid groups to the law that bars "material support" - everything from money to technical know-how to legal advice - to foreign terrorist organizations. The aid groups were only challenging provisions that put them at risk of being prosecuted for talking to terrorist organizations about nonviolent activities. But Chief Justice John Roberts said in his opinion for the court that material support intended even for benign purposes can help a terrorist group in other ways. "Such support frees up other resources within the organization that may be put to violent ends," Roberts said in an opinion joined by four other conservative justices, but also the liberal Justice John Paul Stevens. The court often looks skeptically on laws that criminalize speech and holds them to a high level of scrutiny. But Roberts said there is good reason in this case to defer to Congress and the president, "uniquely positioned to make principled distinctions between activities that will further terrorist conduct and undermine United States foreign policy, and those that will not." Justice Stephen Breyer took the unusual step of reading his dissent aloud in the courtroom. "Not even the 'serious and deadly problem' of international terrorism can require automatic forfeiture of First Amendment rights," he said. The Obama administration said the "material support" law is one of its most important terror-fighting tools. It has been used about 150 times since Sept. 11, resulting in 75 convictions. Most of those cases involved money for terrorist groups. Only a handful dealt with the kind of speech involved in the case decided Monday.

Load-Date: June 22, 2010


End of Document