U.S. TILT TOWARD IRAN MAY NOT BE SENSIBLE
St. Louis Post-Dispatch (Missouri)
November 13, 1992, FRIDAY, FIVE STAR Edition


Copyright 1992 St. Louis Post-Dispatch, Inc.
Section: EDITORIAL; Pg. 3C
Length: 516 words
Byline: William Raspberry
Body


WASHINGTON (REST) he lead story in Tuesday's Washington Post has this headline: ''Technology From West Floods Iran.'' It reports an ''export boom'' of state-of-the-art technology - much of it militarily useful - from European, Asian and American companies into Iran. And it follows by two days another report that American oil companies are now among the biggest customers for Iranian crude, accounting for a quarter of Iran's total oil exports.  Tuesday's paper also carried a report that the Bush administration has mounted a diplomatic effort to curb the technology transfers for fear they might be put to military use. What is going on? Why can't the United States find a reasonable Iran policy and stick to it?  Part of the answer can be spelled: I-R-A-Q. Much of the twisting and turning of U.S. policy can be explained by asking: Which country, Iran or Iraq, do we see as the bigger threat to stability in the region? One day, it's Iran, thought to be the control center for much of the religious fundamentalism, terrorism and hostage-taking that so alarms the West. The next, it's Iraq and its ''madman'' leader Saddam Hussein. Our policy reflects our ambivalence. Maybe we're asking the wrong question.  ''This entire balancing act cannot work,'' says Shahin Gobadi, an exiled Iranian now living here. ''The U.S. interest - indeed the world's interest - lies in having a stable, democratic Iran. Without a stable and democratic Iran, there can be no stability in the region - no matter what you do.''
He is a U.S. spokesman for the People's Mujaheddeen, a Baghdad-based group that for some 27 years has been working against the regimes of both the shah and the ayatollahs, even launching its own war on Iran from the Iraqi border.  His recipe for a stable Iran? Reinstitute and enforce the embargo of arms into, and oil out of, Iran, thereby depriving the present regime of the means for oppressing its own people and hastening the day when Iran will be governed by - guess who? - the mujahedeen.  As a matter of fact, something very close to that ''solution'' has been proposed by Congress. Just last summer, a majority of the House urged the Bush administration to support the mujahedeen, and more than 60 senators signed an October letter urging U.N. action to curb Iran's ''flagrant human rights violations and its support of international terrorism.'' And what would be the guarantee that a mujahedeen-led Iran would not become as big a threat as Tehran and Baghdad are now?  Self-interest, says Gobadi. ''Iran has gone backward at least 50 years since Khomeini took over. The need now is to rebuild and modernize the society . . .'' And Saddam Hussein?  ''A democratic Iran interested in stability and tranquillity in the region would be the best guarantor of a long-lasting peace.'' Maybe. But opposition to the ayatollah and his successors is not precisely synonymous with either democracy or tranquillity. The present on-and-off U.S.  policy toward Iran may not make much sense. But is betting the farm on the mujahedeen that much wiser?  Copyright 1992 Washington Post Writers Group

Load-Date: October 12, 1993


End of Document