U.S., CITING TERRORISM, ADDS TO CURBS ON EXPORTS TO IRAN
The New York Times
September 28, 1984, Friday, Late City Final Edition


Copyright 1984 The New York Times Company
Section: Section A; Page 8, Column 1; Foreign Desk
Length: 394 words
Byline: AP
Dateline: WASHINGTON, Sept. 27
Body


The State Department, citing a continuing pattern of Iranian support for terrorism, said today that new restrictions were being imposed on the export to Iran of aircraft, spare parts for aircraft and high-powered outboard motors.
The Department's deputy spokesman, Alan Romberg, said the restrictions would go into effect on Friday. He said the measures had been under consideration for some time, well last week's terrorist bombing at the United States Embassy near East Beirut.
State Dept, citing continuing pattern of Iranian support for terrorism, says that new restrictions are being imposed on export to Iran of aircraft, spare parts for aircraft and high-powered outboard motors (S)
The new controls tighten and extend anti-terrorism export controls that have been applied to Iran since early this year.
As of Friday, ''a license would be required, and normally not granted, for any exports of aircraft or spare parts for aircraft regardless of value or weight and for export of outboard motors of 45 horsepower and above,'' Mr. Romberg said.
 
Exceptions in Current Rules
He said the existing regulations exempted aircraft consigned to a commercial carrier or which were valued at less than $3 million, and helicopters weighing less than 10,000 pounds. Nor were there restrictions on the sale of spare parts and outboard motors, he said.
In addition, a ban is being imposed on all other goods and technology intended for a ''military end-use or end- user,'' Mr. Romberg said. Previously, such items were not subject to controls unless they were valued at $7 million or more.
In a speech this summer, Secretary of State George P. Shultz listed Iran along with Syria, Libya and North Korea in what he called an international ''league of terror.''
United States officials have said Iran has supported the terrorist group called Islamic Holy War, which has taken responsibility for the three terrorist bombings directed at United States installations in Beirut over the last 17 months.
However, after last week's bombing at the Embassy annex, the officials said they had no evidence tying Iran directly to the incident. While declining to cite specific examples of Iranian- sponsored terrorism, Mr. Romberg said it was a continuing problem.
''We wanted to minimize the possibility of any legal American contribution to Iran's capability for engaging in such support,'' he said.


End of Document