U.S. may divert Special Forces from drug war;
High-skill soldiers may fight terrorism
 The Atlanta Journal-Constitution
November 8, 2002 Friday
Home Edition


Copyright 2002 The Atlanta Journal-Constitution


Section: News;
Length: 331 words
Byline: GEORGE EDMONSON
Body


Washington --- In reviewing the 179 Defense Department anti-drug programs under his supervision, Andre Hollis traveled from the Pentagon to observe some training in action.
In California, he watched as Special Forces troops showed U.S. Border Patrol staffers how to tread water. Near the Texas-Mexico border, Hollis saw Special Forces personnel teach Customs Service agents to ride horseback.
AJC
Hollis didn't doubt the importance of learning such skills. His question focused on the instructors: "Do you need a Green Beret to do this?"
Freeing up some of the military's highly skilled forces for assignment in the war on terrorism has become a major effort for Hollis since he became deputy assistant secretary for counternarcotics in August 2001.
"One of my first tasks was to do a bottom-up review," he said.
Part of the military's $1 billion annual anti-drug effort, begun in 1988, involves working with other agencies to detect air and marine drug shipments.
Hollis has been evaluating what should be kept, jettisoned or turned over to others, an effort that took on greater importance after the Sept. 11 attacks.
Hollis anticipates significant changes. Some operations will die. Those that benefit the war on terrorism could expand.
"So I can't say to you there are X number of programs we're going to cut because what I'm looking at is, 'What is the benefit in terms of our priorities?' " Hollis said.
He added that he would like the see the military "get out of the things that either law enforcement should be doing or can do."
He has sent recommendations to Defense Secretary Donald Rumsfeld, who will make the final decisions.
The Pentagon programs also include testing and steps to reduce drug use among military personnel.
Hollis said he would like to see a more uniform approach to policies and penalties for drug offenders in the services. Currently, he said, those sanctions can vary significantly.
"You shouldn't be treated differently based upon the color of your uniform," Hollis said.

Load-Date: November 8, 2002


End of Document