U.S. ATT'Y: 'THREAT IS CONSTANT' HOMEGROWN TERROR FEAR RISING
Daily News (New York)
December 22, 2010 Wednesday
CITY FINAL EDITION


Copyright 2010 Daily News, L.P.


Section: NEWS; Pg. 2
Length: 327 words
Byline: BY ALISON GENDAR, ROCCO PARASCANDOLA and LUKAS I. ALPERT DAILY NEWS STAFF WRITERS
Body


NEW FRONTS in the war on terror have led to a harder-to-detect enemy, and it may only be a matter of time before one slips through, officials warned yesterday.
"The threat is real. The threat is different. The threat is constant," U.S. Attorney General Eric Holder told ABC's "Good Morning America." "The terrorists only have to be successful once."
Since last year's failed Christmas Day underwear bombing aboard a U.S.-bound flight, homegrown terrorism arrests have been on the rise, reflecting varied approaches to killing Americans.
"You didn't worry about this even two years ago - about individuals, about Americans - to the extent that we now do. And that is of great concern," Holder said. "[People] have to be prepared for potentially bad news."
Counterterrorism experts said the emergence of terror training strongholds in places like Yemen has resulted in a myriad of plots using new tactics.
"It is about getting wins on the board, small, large, successful or not - get something on the board and influence the American psyche," said Don Borelli, a former assistant agent in charge of the FBI Joint Terrorism Task Force who is now with the Soufan Group, a consulting firm.
The NYPD says it has long been aware of the dangers posed by homegrown terrorists and always has kept an eye on threats close to home.
"That's our focus," said Police Commissioner Raymond Kelly. "While Al Qaeda central and Al Qaeda affiliates pose ongoing threats of their own, the homegrown lone wolves or small unaffiliated groups are already here."
Holder said that of 126 people indicted on terrorism charges in the last year, 50 were U.S. citizens.
"Whether it is an attempt to bomb the New York City subway system, an attempt to bring down an airplane over Detroit, an attempt to set off a bomb in Times Square . . . I think that gives us a sense of the breadth of the challenges that we face, and the kinds of things that our enemy is trying to do," he said.
lalpert@nydailynews.com

Load-Date: December 22, 2010


End of Document