U.S. must rid world of terrorism -- completely
Deseret News (Salt Lake City)
September 29, 2001, Saturday


Copyright 2001 The Deseret News Publishing Co.
Section: OPINION;
Length: 687 words
Byline: By John RobinsonDeseret News editorial writer
Body


Fighting terrorism is like fighting cancer. You either destroy it or it destroys you. And the sooner it is dealt with, the better are the chances for victory.
That, in brief, is the thinking of Zvi A. Vapni, deputy consul general of Israel. Vapni, who is based in Los Angeles, was in Salt Lake City earlier this week and visited with the Deseret News editorial board Wednesday.
The visit had been planned before terrorists hijacked four planes and crashed three of them into the World Trade Center and the Pentagon on Sept. 11. Those attacks and their ramifications became the focus of the dialogue.
Israel has been battling terrorism since it became a state in 1948. U.S. citizens now have an understanding of what it feels like to be Israelis, Vapni said.
Unless terrorism is defeated now, it will become an increasingly difficult problem to overcome.
"If we're not going to deal with them (terrorists) today, what will we do 10 years from now when they take over Pakistan and have nuclear weapons?" Vapni queried.
He added that the way to defeat terrorism is to put a lot of pressure on the countries that harbor terrorists. "You must make it impossible for them (terrorists) to find safe havens anywhere."
Vapni is right. His views are similar to those expressed by President Bush and Secretary of Defense Donald Rumsfeld.
And while it's silly to compare terrorists to mosquitoes, the process to eliminate them is the same -- getting rid of their breeding places. Rumsfeld basically said that on Tuesday when he told a group of reporters at the Pentagon that the United States would "drain the swamp" that breeds terrorists.
That means going after their sponsors, those countries that provide them shelter and equipment. Those nations that give them a lifeline are accomplices to whatever terrorists do.
"The terrorists do not function in a vacuum. They don't live in Antarctica. They work, they train and they plan in countries. They're benefiting from the support of governments," Rumsfeld stated.
The strategy seems sound. The test now is the commitment by both the Bush administration and the public.
Rumsfeld is wisely preparing the public for a long campaign, one that will last years.
It will start, apparently, in Afghanistan, which has been harboring the prime suspect in the attacks, Osama bin Laden. Equally culpable are those who have harbored bin Laden, the Taliban, the extremist religious militia that rules most of Afghanistan. The Taliban cannot be allowed to stay in power.
But dismantling bin Laden's al-Qaida terrorist network, which some officials believe may operate in as many as 60 countries, is just phase one in the war on terrorism. Completing phase one successfully will make the succeeding phases easier to accomplish.
The State Department has listed seven nations as sponsors of terrorism -- Iran, Iraq, Libya, Sudan, Syria, Cuba and North Korea.
Cuba and North Korea, while considered rogue governments, have not been linked to terrorism for several years. According to reports, Libya and Sudan have backed off on terrorist activities.
The countries that have to be stabilized or neutralized to win the war against terrorism are Iraq, Iran and Syria. It seems inconceivable that anything worthwhile can be accomplished in Iraq as long as Saddam Hussein remains in power. His regime will have to be toppled.
Iran and Syria have an opportunity more or less for a free pass. Despite their histories of supporting terrorism, there are indications they will change their ways if enough pressure is put on them to do so.
And that's the key to winning this war -- sustained, relentless pressure. Actions must mirror words. If that means military might must be used to bring about those changes, then that is what must be done.
Those who support terrorism have to be shown that their conduct is no longer acceptable to the world community.
Regardless of what else his administration does, if Bush is able to rid the planet of terrorism, he will not have only performed a great service for his country but for the world as well.
Deseret News editorial writer John Robinson can be reached by e-mail at jrob@desnews.com  

Load-Date: September 29, 2001


End of Document