U.S. ASSERTS THE KILLERS ARE 'BEYOND THE PALE'
The New York Times
December 28, 1985, Saturday, Late City Final Edition


Copyright 1985 The New York Times Company
Section: Section 1; Page 5, Column 1; Foreign Desk
Length: 771 words
Byline: By BERNARD GWERTZMAN, Special to the New York Times
Dateline: WASHINGTON, Dec. 27
Body


The United States said today that those who carried out the terrorist attacks in Rome and Vienna were ''beyond the pale of civilization'' and that all nations must join in ''bringing to justice those responsible.''
Referring to resolutions against terrorism passed recently by the United Nations General Assembly and Security Council, the State Department said, ''These latest outrages demonstrate again that terrorism threatens all nations.''
''In line with the resolution passed unanimously earlier this month by the United Nations General Assembly,'' said Charles E. Redman, a department spokesman, ''we call upon all members of the world community to join us in combating forcefully these criminal acts and bringing to justice those responsible.''
 
President Was Informed
Larry Speakes, the White House spokesman, told reporters aboard Air Force One that Mr. Reagan was told of the airport attacks at 7 A.M., before he boarded the plane for a trip to California.
Mr. Speakes said, ''This underscores the need for nations to work together to put an end to terrorism.''
''We hope that those who are responsible for this cowardly act would be apprehended and punished to the fullest extent of the law,'' he said.
Secretary of State George P. Shultz, whom the department told of the attacks while he was on holiday in Palo Alto, Calif., approved the toughly worded statement. It drew on his own recent remarks in which he angrily rebuked the Yugoslav Foreign Minister for suggesting that acts of terrorism by Palestinians could be explained by their ''cause.''
Mr. Redman said, ''There must be no place to hide for terrorists.''
 
'Beyond the Pale'
''Terrorists who kill and maim innocent civilians,'' he said, ''are beyond the pale of civilization and must be held responsible for their crimes, which no cause can justify. People and nations who respect decency and humanity have a common obligation to work together to end this menace.''
Experts in counterterrorism were assessing the attacks, which occurred even though there had been generalized warnings to airports in recent weeks to be on guard against the possibility of stepped-up terrorist actions.
One senior official said he hoped that since one of the terrorist suspects had been arrested in Rome and two in Vienna, valuable information would be gathered on how the attacks had been organized and about which nations, if any, had provided support.
There is a widespread belief among intelligence specialists that Libya played a key role in aiding the hijacking of an Egyptair plane from Athens to Malta last month. One State Department expert said that if the shootings in Rome and Vienna were organized by the renegade Palestinian group led by Abu Nidal, it would also further implicate the Libyans, and perhaps also the Syrians.
 
A caller to a
Spanish radio station said that the attacks had been carried out by the ''Abu Nidal faction of the Costa del Sol,'' but there was no indication that the assertion was genuine.
 
U.N. Action a Possibility
Now that General Assembly and the Security Council of the United Nations have both passed resolutions calling for world action against terrorism, there could be some moves in the world body to take action against a nation identified as having given sanctuary or support to those who carried out terrorist attacks.
But officials said it was premature to say what the United States might do. They said that information on those who had carried out the attacks was still too fragmentary Mr. Shultz has said he would like to see retaliatory action taken against those responsible for terrorist acts. But there was no indication that the United States was planning any actions of its own.
It was also not clear whether Washington felt that the Israelis should retaliate, since the El Al check-in counter at both the Rome and Vienna airports seemed to be the primary targets.
 
'Against Many Nationalities'
''At this point, we have no information concerning the responsibility for the attacks,'' Mr. Redman said.
Although and least three Americans were killed in Rome, Mr. Redman strove not to describe these as attacks on Americans or on Israelis. ''This was an attack against many nationalities, many countries,'' he said.
''As I've said before, we're all in this together,'' Mr. Redman said. ''Unfortunately, again, there were Americans killed, but there were also innocent victims of other nationalities, and, as I said, we can only deplore and condemn in the strongest terms this sort of cowardly criminal act.''
He said the United States believed that the authorities at the Rome and Vienna airports had taken ''adequate security precautions.''

Graphic

 
Photo of injured passengers on floor of international lounge at the Rome airport (Reuters)


End of Document