U.S.-Soviet relations
St. Petersburg Times (Florida)
January 4, 1988, Monday, City Edition


Times Publishing Company
Section: EDITORIAL; After 1988; Pg. 8A; EDITORIAL; SERIES
Length: 969 words
Body


This is another in a periodic series of    editorials on issues facing the country in    the 1988 elections.
 

 

 
   "… I urge you to beware the temptation … to ignore the facts    of history and the aggressive impulses of an evil empire, to simply    call the arms race a giant misunderstanding and thereby remove    yourself from the struggle between right and wrong, good and evil."
 
 - President Reagan in March 1983, addressing an Orlando convention of    the National Association of Evangelicals.    "My first name is Ron."
    "Mine is Mikhail."
 
  - President Reagan and Soviet General Secretary Gorbachev getting    reacquainted at the start of last month's summit.
 
    The Soviet Union under Mikhail Gorbachev is neither an implacable    "evil empire" nor a new best friend with whom we have established an    enduring first-name relationship. Instead, it remains what it has long    been: a complex, closed society too powerful to ignore.
 
     Even Ronald Reagan ultimately realized the imperative of opening a    constructive dialogue with the Soviet Union, but the United States    still seems incapable of dealing with the Soviets in a consistent and    realistic way. Instead, we proceed in fits and starts, alternately    attempting to demonize or Americanize the Soviet leadership. For the    time being, much of Washington seems to be caught up in the    Americanization of Gorbachev, a misdirected effort almost certain to    lead to a backlash the next time the Soviet leader does something to    remind us of his true nationality and ideology.
 
     The differences between the Soviet Union and the United States    remain immense. Every U.S. president must recognize them and, when    possible, work to resolve them. At the same time, every president must    recognize the even larger responsibilities that the two countries    share, including the most awesome responsibility of all: control of the    two nuclear arsenals capable of destroying modern civilization.
 
     Fortunately, the world seems to have survived several years of    irresponsibility on the part of both superpowers. For most of this    decade, the leaders of the United States and Soviet Union seemed    determined to exacerbate their differences and ignore their areas of    mutual interest.
 
     The next president of the United States - and the billions of    people dependent on his actions - cannot afford the luxury of wasting    time. There is obvious potential for further U.S.-Soviet cooperation on    a range of issues on which our interests converge:        Arms control: So far, the only major achievement emanating from the    three Reagan-Gorbachev summits is last month's treaty to eliminate    medium-range nuclear missiles. The next president should be in a    position to use that agreement as a springboard for a much more    significant treaty reducing each side's stockpile of intercontinental    ballistic missiles.
 
     However, any progress on a treaty to reduce long-range missiles    almost surely is contingent upon an understanding that the United    States and Soviet Union will continue to adhere to the restrictions of    the 1972 ABM treaty. The next president should work with the general    secretary to assure that neither country will proceed with any testing    or deployment of a space-based defense system that would abrogate ABM    and lead to a new escalation in the deployment of offensive nuclear    weapons. Both nations' economies - and the world's security - depend on    such an agreement.
 
     Anti-terrorism policy: The United States and Soviet Union have an    obvious mutual interest in working together to deal with the threat of    P terrorism - including nuclear terrorism - that outlaw groups and outlaw    nations pose for civilized countries of every ideology. The need for    coordinated effort becomes more and more crucial as the technology of    terrorism becomes more complex and readily available.
 
     Regional issues: The term has become a euphemism for civil wars,    such as those in Nicaragua and Afghanistan, in which either the United    States or Soviet Union has become involved. The resolution of those    conflicts would ease the most obvious areas of tension between the    superpowers, but the negotiation of truly regional conflicts in the    Persian Gulf, southern Africa and elsewhere offers an even larger    opportunity for positive U.S.-Soviet cooperation.
 
     That cooperation could begin soon with a jointly enforced arms    embargo on Iran. Americans and Soviets alike have similar motives,    including the control of terrorism, for working to end the Iran-Iraq    war and limit the spread of radical Islamic fundamentalism.
 
     Trade and technology: Gorbachev is desperate for it, and American    industry is eager to pursue the huge Soviet market. The United States    has no more effective tool for influencing and anticipating Soviet    behavior, yet we have barely begun to explore the ways of developing    our economic and cultural ties. So long as expanded U.S.-Soviet    economic relations are balanced and do not compromise our military and    technological secrets, they offer a great opportunity for our    government and private sector.
 
     None of these new U.S.-Soviet links should blind us to the enduring    chasm between our two societies. Our ideologies and cultures will    remain very different. Our spheres of competition, and our occasional    hostilities, will not disappear.
 
      However, the cultivation of our mutual interests can help to make    our differences gradually more manageable and more understandable. For    the short term, that is about all that should be expected of    U.S.-Soviet relations. The American people should be wary of our    leaders' occasional urges to do too much more too quickly.
 

Load-Date: November 10, 1992


End of Document