U.S. SAID TO BE SHIFTING ITS COUNTER-TERROR OPERATIONS; FBI WOULD TAKE A LEADING ROLE, REPLACING THE CIA
Pittsburgh Post-Gazette (Pennsylvania)
May 29, 2009 Friday
SOONER EDITION


Copyright 2009 P.G. Publishing Co.
Section: NATIONAL; Pg. A-6
Length: 591 words
Byline: Josh Meyer, Los Angeles Times
Body


WASHINGTON -- The FBI and Justice Department plan to expand their role in global counter-terrorism operations significantly, part of a U.S. policy shift that will replace a CIA-dominated system of clandestine detentions and interrogations with one built around transparent investigations and prosecutions.
Under the "global justice" initiative, which has been in the works for several months, FBI agents will have a central role in overseas counter-terrorism cases. They will expand their questioning of suspects and evidence-gathering to try to ensure that criminal prosecutions are an option, officials familiar with the effort said.
Though the initiative is a work in progress, some senior counter-terrorism officials and administration policy-makers envision it as key to the national security strategy President Barack Obama laid out last week -- one which presumes that most accused terrorists have the right to contest charges against them in a "legitimate" setting.
The approach effectively reverses a mainstay of the Bush administration's war on terrorism, in which global counter-terrorism was treated primarily as an intelligence and military problem, not a law enforcement one. That policy led to establishment of the U.S. military prison at Guantanamo Bay in Cuba, harsh interrogations and detentions without trials.
The "global justice" initiative starts out with the premise that virtually all suspects will end up in a U.S. or foreign court of law. That will be the case whether a suspected terrorist is captured on the battlefields of Iraq and Afghanistan, in the Philippine jungle or in a mosque in Nigeria, said one senior U.S. counter-terrorism official with knowledge of the initiative.
"Regardless of where any bad guy is caught, we want the bureau to be in a position to put charges on them," the official said, adding that the Bush administration's emphasis on CIA and military operations often marginalized the FBI -- especially when it came to interrogating suspects.
Like others interviewed for this article, the official spoke one condition of anonymity because no one has been authorized to discuss the initiative publicly.
Upon taking office in January, Mr. Obama shut down the CIA's secret "black site" prisons and forbade use of coercive interrogation techniques. That opened the door for an increased role for the FBI, which for the last year has deployed more agents and analysts overseas to work alongside the CIA, U.S. military and foreign governments.
The initiative would mean even broader incorporation of the FBI and Justice Department into global counter-terrorism operations. Many national security officials said it is a vindication of the FBI, which before Sept. 11 had played a leading role in international terrorism investigations.
FBI agents for years had used non-coercive interrogations to thwart attacks, win convictions of al-Qaida operatives and gain an encyclopedic knowledge of how the terrorist network operates. But they withdrew from questioning important suspects after the bureau opposed the tactics being used by the CIA and military -- often by inexperienced civilian contractors.
The harsh interrogations provided such bad information that U.S. agents spent years chasing false leads around the world, former FBI agent Ali Soufan testified before Congress two weeks ago. "It was one of the worst and most harmful decisions made in our efforts against al-Qaida."
Bush administration officials, however, have defended the tactics and rejected claims that the FBI's methods would have worked better.

Load-Date: May 29, 2009


End of Document