U.S. WAR ON TERRORISM CARRIES A HEAVY GAMBLE
Richmond Times Dispatch (Virginia)
September 23, 2001 Sunday City Edition


Copyright 2001 Richmond Newspapers, Inc.
Section: GENERAL; Pg. B-2
Length: 702 words
Byline: John Hall, John Hall is the senior Washington correspondent of Media General News Service. E-mail jhall@media-general.com,  
Body


Take a look at a map of Central Asia and you will see the enormity of the challenge we face just getting deployed to attack Afghanistan.
To the east and south is Pakistan, the friendliest place in the area but a nuclear state that is on the edge of breakdown and turmoil. To the west is Iran, which hates Afghanistan's ruling Taliban radicals worse than anyone but isn't likely to cooperate with the United States on any endeavor.
Finally, to the north, are the two former republics of the Soviet Union that have been independent for a decade but still have close ties with Russia.
Those two nations - Uzbekistan and Tajikistan - represent the most intriguing new aspect of the war on terrorism.
There are reports that U.S. Air Force F-16 fighters will be located in both of these countries. If true, this deployment would mark a new stage in the post Cold War order - testing the U.S.-Russian friendship in a way that has never happened before. The reason is that both countries have huge ethnic Russian populations and Russian "peacekeeping" troops helping defend their borders with Afghanistan.
A whole motorized division of Russian troops has been in Tajikistan - home to thousands of ethnic Russians - by invitation since the fall of the Soviet empire. The 15,000 or so Russian troops there have been battered and scarred in one of the world's most persistent but least-observed wars.
The Russians have endured heavy casualties in border clashes with the Taliban since they were run out of Afghanistan.
American air crews and special forces stationed there probably would be dependent, at least initially, for Russian protection on the ground.
The irony of this evolving relationship is that, not long ago, Russian troops were fighting in Afghanistan to prop up a puppet government that was being challenged by insurgents trained and equipped by the United States. Those insurgents, who eventually ran the interlopers out, are now the Taliban. They now stand accused of becoming willing hosts for Osama bin Laden, the suspected mastermind of the World Trade Center and Pentagon attacks Sept. 11.
In the war on terrorism, it is clear that President Bush intends to work closely with Russian President Vladimir Putin and drop the drumbeat of criticism against Putin for his own fight against Islamic terrorists in Chechnya. It may not be a formal military alliance they are creating, but the two countries' mutual interest in defeating radical Islamic forces that have struck at both their homelands has become a central dynamic of Bush's response to the Sept. 11 attacks.
That is quite a change. In the Gulf War waged by Bush's father, Moscow was just a passive bystander. And in the succession of international struggles in the Balkans, Russia was a grudging and limited partner.
Even in World War II the two allies were on separate ends of the battlefield. In Tajikistan, if this comes off, they would occupy the same front.
There is a heavy peril in an American deployment there. It would place American bases right in the middle of a civil war between the secular Tajik government and its Islamic majority. That majority might be doubly inflamed by the presence of another non-Islamic country invading their soil alongside the Russians, who have been there since the 19th century. And the refugee crisis created by an all-out American assault on Afghanistan could be a disaster for Tajikistan, already dirt poor and struggling for survival.
While all that sounds like an enormous gamble, it might turn out to be the best of several bad choices for President Bush. Stationing aircraft and troops anywhere in this inhospitable part of the world is a forbidding task.
Pakistan, in an effort to appease its own growing radical population, has kissed up to the Taliban so much that it will be an undependable ally.
American forces may have to spend more time watching their backs than fighting.
At least, the former Soviet Union has a tradition of secularism and has its own excruciating grudge against the Taliban. That will make it easier to wage war against the Taliban's Islamic fundamentalists without the kind of religious, historical and emotional hang-ups that even friendly Arab states like Saudi Arabia and Egypt have.

Load-Date: September 26, 2001


End of Document