U.S. RAISING SECURITY AT ITS EMBASSIES
The New York Times
February 26, 1981, Thursday, Late City Final Edition


Copyright 1981 The New York Times Company
Section: Section A; Page 3, Column 2; Foreign Desk
Length: 578 words
Byline: By CHARLES MOHR, Special to the New York Times
Dateline: WASHINGTON, Feb. 25
Body


The Reagan Administration told Congress today that it was ''urgently upgrading'' physical security measures at two dozen United States diplomatic missions abroad where there is a ''high threat'' of attack.
Under questioning by Democratic members of the House Foreign Affairs Committee, Walter J. Stoessel Jr., Under Secretary of State for Political Affairs, said it was ''correct'' that the new Administration was not ruling out the possibiliity of negotiating in a future seizure of American personnel. At another point, Mr.  Stoessel said that ''we would not wish to be categorical'' about a policy of no negotiation.
Government plans to upgrade physical security measures at two dozen US diplomatic missions in "high threat" foreign countries
However, his remarks did not appear to be any significant retreat from the new Administration's policy, which was enunciated last week in reference to the American hostages Iran held and was reiterated by Mr. Stoessel in his prepared statement this morning, that ''we would not have negotiated for the hostages' release.''
Mr. Stoessel, the third-ranking official in the State Department, stressed several times that the Administration would act ''swiftly'' and ''expeditiously'' in any seizure of hostages and would try to avoid prolonged and deadlocked bargaining with terrorists or a hostile foreign government.
 
Missions Not Identified
Mr. Stoessel outlined steps the Government is undertaking or studying to improve and clarify antiterrorist policy. He said a special fund of $41.9 million, already appropriated by Congress, was being used to upgrade security measures at 24 ''high threat posts'' abroad, adding that survey teams had gone to 17 of the posts. A State Department spokesman said the posts would not be identified for security reasons.
Officials have said that the Marine guard detachments, electronic locks, steel doors and other security measures at embassies and consulates are not intended to permit prolonged defense without help from the host government.
Mr. Stoessel said the improvements would enable missions to delay attackers long enough to destroy national security information and ''to permit personnel to withdraw to a secure safe haven.'' An official said later that this meant a haven in an embassy building where diplomtic personnel could await rescue by a host government.  In the case of Iran, the Government sent no help.
 
Intelligence Effort Made
Saying that ''more extensive intelligence and better information on terrorist threats'' was needed, Mr. Stoessel remarked that the intelligence agencies were ''now giving very high priority'' to improving a now inadequate base of information. This would improve early warning of trouble, he predicted.
Mr. Stoessel also said the State Department was refining its ability to deal with crises by ''training, simulations and crisis exercises'' and was seeking better cooperation with other departments. He added that the United States was studyng ''a wide range of possible international initiatives'' to obtain more rapid and certain international sanctions against any nation that violated diplomatic immunity.
He said the public and perhaps terrorists had thought the United States was not serious in its policies on terrorism.  ''This Administration has made absolutely clear that it will react swiftly, effectively and with all the resources at its disposal should we face an act of state-supported violence and terrorism in the future.'' he said.


End of Document