U.S. SAID TO HAVE WEIGHED RAID ON TRAINING CAMP IN NICARAGUA
The New York Times
July 24, 1985, Wednesday, Late City Final Edition


Copyright 1985 The New York Times Company
Section: Section A; Page 1, Column 4; Foreign Desk
Length: 942 words
Byline: By JOEL BRINKLEY, Special to the New York Times
Dateline: WASHINGTON, July 23
Body


The Reagan Administration seriously considered attacking a base in Nicaragua where it believes Salvadoran guerrillas were trained, senior Administration officials said today.
The officials, who included aides in the State and Defense Departments, said they believed one or more of the Salvadorans involved in the attack last month, in which four United States marines and two American civilians were killed, had been trained there.
The plan, discussed at senior levels in the White House, would have involved a so-called surgical air strike against one or more training camps that the Administration says Nicaragua has set up in the countryside not far from Managua.
 
Sandinistas Get Warning
The officials decided not to carry out the plan but to warn the Nicaraguan Government instead of ''serious consequences'' should the Administration conclude that it was linked to terrorist acts in the future.
Senior State and Defense Department aides say Reagan Administration seriously considered attacking base in Nicaragua where it believes Salvadoran guerrillas were trained; they believed that one of more of Salvadorans involved in June attack in which four US Marines and two American civilians were killed had been trained there; plan whould have involved so-called surgical air strike; officials decided, instead, to warn Nicaraguan Government of 'serious consequences' should Administration conclude it was linked to future terrorist acts (M)
Nicaragua has strongly denied that it has either practiced or supported terrorism and has characterized United States support of anti-Government rebels as state-sponsored terrorism against Nicaragua.
Harry E. Bergold Jr., the United States Ambassador to Nicaragua, delivered the American warning to the Sandinista Government last Wednesday. Today, a senior official said the Administration had ''laid down the gauntlet'' with that warning by stating that any future Sandinista-inspired terrorist attacks would constitute ''another situation like acquiring MIG's.''
 
Earlier Warnings on Planes
Since last fall the Administration has said that if Nicaragua acquires high-performance fighter planes, such as Soviet MIG-21's, the United States will probably order a ''surgical'' air strike to destroy them.
The term surgical air strike is used to describe a limited attack intended to destroy a specific target and then end without further involvement and with limited civilian casualities. Some Administration officials say the term is probably a misnomer in Nicaragua's case because the Sandinistas would almost certainly respond to even a limited attack, perhaps by attacking the United States Embassy in Managua, leading to more general military action.
For several years, Administration officials have contended that the Sandinistas maintain secret bases where leftist guerrillas from El Salvador are trained, a charge the Nicaraguan Government has repeatedly denied. The Administation has declined to give detailed information, saying the material is classified.
 
Reports Called Not Conclusive
But senior officials with access to sensitive information about Nicaragua said recent intelligence had led the Administration to believe that one or more of the Salvadorans involved in the shooting of the marines in San Salvador on June 19 were trained at one of the camps near Managua. In addition to the four marines and two other Americans, seven people were killed.
It was these new reports that inspired the discussions about retaliation, the officials said. They acknowledged that the information was not conclusive, but cited a report that one or more of the Salvadoran killers visited Nicaragua within 48 hours of the shootings.
The diplomatic note delivered last week also said the United States had ''indications that preparations are under way to introduce a program of terrorist attacks against U.S. personnel in Honduras,'' where the United States maintains a large military presence.
''We are aware that the Government of Nicaragua supports those involved in these preparations,'' the note said, ''and we believe the Government of Nicaragua may be directly involved.''
President Daniel Ortega Saavedra, responding to the note, said in a speech last week that ''Nicaragua has neither practiced nor supported terrorism, nor has it been involved in any terroristic act.'' Nicaraguans, he said, were ''victims of United States terrorism'' because of the American support for the Nicaraguan rebels.
 
'Every Right to Strike Back'
Administration officials recently began calling the Salvadoran guerrillas and their purported backers in Nicaragua terrorists, an official said, to bring any future military strike or other action under the oratorical umbrella of the Administration's campaign against terrorism.
''We have every right to strike back at terrorists,'' a senior official said today. ''That's our stated policy.''
In the last several years, the Administration has often threatened retaliation against terrorists, particularly in Lebanon, but has yet to act.
In one case, when intelligence information pinpointed Shiite terrorists in Lebanon who were believed to have been involved in the bombing of the United States Marine barracks in Beirut almost two years ago, President Reagan approved a joint air strike with the French Air Force. But at the last minute Defense Secretary Caspar W. Weinberger called off the operation, and the French attacked alone.
More recently, the Administration made repeated threats against the Lebanese involved in the hijacking of a T.W.A. jetliner last month. But in the end the United States did nothing except try to stop air traffic at the Beirut airport, and that effort largely failed.


End of Document