U.S. points new sanctions at Iran, Libya
The Tampa Tribune (Florida)
August 6, 1996, Tuesday,
FINAL EDITION


Copyright 1996 The Tribune Co. Publishes The Tampa Tribune
Section: NATION/WORLD,
Length: 680 words
Body


SUMMARY: European allies gripe about economic fallout, but President Clinton signs a law to punish investors in the sponsors of terrorism.
WASHINGTON - President Clinton signed legislation Monday imposing harsh economic sanctions on companies that make future investments in Iranian and Libyan petroleum ventures and vowed to wage an international battle against terrorism, with or without key U.S. allies.
The bill, crafted by Congress to deny Iran and Libya revenues that could be used to finance terrorist attacks, has drawn criticism from France, Germany and other European allies who say it could damage their economies.
A spokesman for the French Foreign Ministry in Paris charged Monday the legislation would "create a particularly dangerous precedent for the security and development of commerce."
ERIC PIANIN; of The Washington Post
Clinton brushed aside the complaints, declaring at a White House bill signing ceremony "every advanced country is going to have to make up its mind whether it can do business with people by day who turn around and fuel attacks on their innocent civilians by night."
Later, during a foreign policy address at George Washington University, Clinton chided Congress for refusing to pass anti-terrorism measures he has sought to combat domestic terrorism, including expanded wiretapping authority for the FBI and a requirement chemical markers be used in manufacturing black and smokeless powders commonly used in bombs. He said he would press for action on those and other measures when Congress returns next month from its recess.
"I want to make it clear to the American people that while we can defeat terrorists, it will be a long time before we defeat terrorism," Clinton said. "America will remain a target because we are uniquely present in the world … because we have taken a tougher stand against terrorism, and because we are the most open society on Earth."
As he signed the legislation, the president described Iran and Libya as "two of the most dangerous supporters of terrorism in the world." He said the legislation would help to deny those countries money they need to finance international terrorism and to obtain weapons of mass destruction. He also said it would intensify pressure on Libya to extradite the suspects in the 1988 bombing of Pan Am Flight 103 over Lockerbie, Scotland.
Also Monday, the United States announced it is distributing up to 1,000 posters in Arabic and English offering a $ 2 million reward for information leading to a conviction in the June 25 bombing that killed 19 Americans in an apartment building outside Dhahran, Saudi Arabia.
Most of the posters will be circulated in Arab countries.
Lawmakers frequently cited Pan Am 103, as well as last month's explosion of TWA Flight 800, where a bomb is suspected, as they pressed for the sanctions legislation. Libya and Iran are on the State Department's list of nations supporting terrorism and the United States has banned trade with both.
The legislation will impose sanctions on foreign companies that provide new investments of more than $ 40 million for the development of oil and gas resources in Iran or Libya. It sanctions foreign companies that violate United Nations prohibitions against trade with Libya involving arms, certain oil equipment and civil aviation services.
Punishment would range from denial of Export-Import Bank assistance to prohibition on loans or credits from U.S. financial institutions of more than $ 10 million in any 12-month period to denial of U.S. government procurement opportunities. U.S. companies are already barred from doing business with Iran and Libya.
A French firm, Total SA, has been active in Iran and Libya. Some U.S. officials were outraged last year when the company took over development of two giant offshore oil and gas fields in Iran after the United States barred Conoco and other American companies from the project.
Administration officials stressed Monday the legislation would not affect companies or individuals doing business in the two countries, only those that enter into new contracts or investments.

Load-Date: August 8, 1996


End of Document