U.S. undertaking praised overseas; 6-month mark: World's solidarity against terrorism still strong
Telegraph Herald (Dubuque, IA)
March 12, 2002 Tuesday


Copyright 2002 Woodward Communications, Inc.
Section: Pg. a5
Length: 357 words
Byline: ASSOCIATED PRESS
Dateline: LONDON
Body


U.S. allies praised the way the United States responded to the terrorist attacks it suffered six months ago, saying Monday that Americans showed courage in dealing with a "savage and immeasurable crime."
In London, British Prime Minister Tony Blair praised the "decisive action" taken by U.S. allies. He met with Vice President Dick Cheney to discuss the next step in the anti-terrorism campaign and endorsed Cheney's call for possibly widening the targets of that effort.
In Afghanistan, the U.S. Embassy in Kabul flew the Stars and Stripes at half-staff to mark the six months since Sept. 11. Embassy personnel gathered as U.S. Marine guards lowered the flag and a bugle sounded in the background.
"Never again, never again," said acting U.S. Ambassador Ryan Crocker, as he thanked the employees for their "sustained efforts."
"We've won the war," he said. "We have to win the peace."
Crocker said he was flying into New York during the Sept. 11 attacks and from his airplane seat saw one of the World Trade Center towers in flames. "It means a lot to me to be on the other side of Ground Zero," he said.
Like Blair, Crocker said the campaign to root out Taliban and the al-Qaida holdouts was a success.
In Brussels, Belgium, European Union foreign ministers called the battle against terrorism "more than ever, a priority goal."
"The terrorist attacks against the people and the institutions of the United States were indeed an attack against all of us," the 15 ministers said in joint statement. "Time will not erase the memory of this savage and immeasurable crime."
The strong show of solidarity contrasted with recent unease over U.S. foreign policy, especially Bush's comment in his State of the Union speech in January that Iran, Iraq and North Korea were an "axis of evil" that might provide weapons of mass destruction to terrorists.
In addition, there has been criticism of suggestions by Cheney and other U.S. officials that the war might be extended to include Iraq.
But on Monday, the ministers said their solidarity was intact.
"It is necessary that all countries combine their efforts to make impunity for terrorists impossible," they said.

Load-Date: March 16, 2002


End of Document