U.S. DAWDLES IN ANSWERING GERMAN QUERY FOR DATA IN BOMBING THAT KILLED 2 GIS
Salt Lake Tribune (Utah)
August 3, 1994, Wednesday


Copyright 1994 The Salt Lake Tribune
Section: Nation-World; Pg. A5
Length: 379 words
Byline: By Rick Atkinson THE WASHINGTON POST
Dateline: BERLIN
Body

-- The U.S. government has taken more than a year to respond to repeated German requests for information considered crucial to the extradition and prosecution of the prime suspect in the 1986 bombing of a Berlin nightclub packed with American soldiers, according to U.S. and German officials.
The initial German query for intelligence data on the La Belle discotheque attack was drafted in May 1993, with subsequent appeals -- marked "urgent" -- sent to Washington on Dec. 13, 1993, and Feb. 16 and April 22, 1994, officials said.
In each case, German investigators sought evidence that would further implicate a Libyan-financed Palestinian terrorist who until recently was in jail in Lebanon and is accused of having masterminded the Berlin bombing that killed three people, including two U.S. soldiers and a Turkish woman, and injured 230.
The Justice Department finally sent a reply to Bonn on June 29.  German investigators said they have yet to receive either that message or a related response reportedly drafted by the CIA. The German Jusice Ministry disclosed T sday that Lebanese authorities have released the suspect, a development that a German official called "extremely negative" and that could jeopardize extradition efforts.
U.S. sources familiar with the case blamed the delay on rigid compartmentalization among law-enforcement and intelligence agencies -- including the CIA and the National Security Agency -- as well as reluctance in Washington to honor a German request to have a U.S. official testify.  "We're not hiding the ball on them," the U.S. official said of the Germans. "There's always a chance that I'm getting stiffed by my own intelligence services, but I don't think so. . . . It's not unusual that these things take an inordinate amount of time."
The La Belle bombing on April 5, 1986, remains one of the unsolved mysteries in the annals of the war on terrorism.
The U.S. government exacted vengeance but never justice for the attack, launching punitive airstrikes against Libya for sponsoring the terrorism, yet failing to catch the culprits who actually planted the bomb. Still, many officials also say the case escalated into an even-bloodier Libyan response in the destruction of Pan Am Flight 103 over Lockerbie, Scotland, in December 1988.

Load-Date: April 17, 1995


End of Document