U.S. lowers terrorism alert for financial institutions
St. Louis Post-Dispatch (Missouri)
November 11, 2004 Thursday
FIVE STAR LATE LIFT EDITION


Copyright 2004 St. Louis Post-Dispatch, Inc.
Section: NEWS; Pg. A02
Length: 272 words
Byline: THE ASSOCIATED PRESS
Dateline: WASHINGTON 
Body


Federal authorities have lowered the terrorism alert status for areas around financial institutions in New York, Washington and northern New Jersey, saying Wednesday that additional security precautions had reduced the threat.
The lowering from orange to yellow, the midpoint on the government's five-level terrorism warning system, comes three months after the alert was raised because of concerns the institutions and the areas around them could be al-Qaida targets. 
Yellow is "elevated," while orange is considered a "high" threat of attack. 
In a conference call with reporters, Homeland Security Deputy Secretary James Loy said improvements in security and emergency preparations taken since the threat was raised Aug. 1 allowed the government to make the change. 
But he warned that the threat of an attack remains.
"We are as concerned today as we were a month ago," Loy said. "My sense is this particular enemy will pick their time and pick their place."
Homeland Security set the threat level at orange for areas surrounding and including the Citigroup Center building and the New York Stock Exchange in New York, the International Monetary Fund and World Bank buildings in Washington and Prudential Financial Inc.'s headquarters in Newark, N.J.
The rest of the nation remained at yellow.
New York officials have chosen to keep the city at orange since the attacks of Sept. 11, 2001, even though the rest of the country has been at yellow most of the time.
New York City Police Department spokesman Paul Browne said Wednesday's announcement would not change the city's status.
"We remain on orange alert as we have since 9/11," he said.

Notes

 PAGE 2 

Load-Date: November 11, 2004


End of Document