U.S. In For Long Fight, Says Homeland Deputy; Private Sector Must Help Safeguard Infrastructure
Federal Times
August 25, 2003 Monday


Copyright 2003 Army Times Publishing Co. All Rights Reserved
Section: HOMELAND SECURITY; Pg. 9
Length: 375 words
Byline: By WILLIAM MATTHEWS, Warren Zinn/Federal Times
Body


Terrorism is the third extreme "ism" the United States has confronted, and like its predecessors - fascism and communism - it will take a massive and prolonged effort to defeat, Gordon England, deputy secretary of Homeland Security, said Aug. 20.
The wars in Afghanistan and Iraq are only the beginning, much like the Korean War was the beginning of 40 years of Cold War against communism, England said in an address to the Heritage Foundation in Washington.
But unlike the earlier struggles, in which nation clashed against nation, terrorism involves a small number of individuals threatening whole nations, potentially with the same kind of destructive power once only possessed by countries, he said. Thus terrorism constitutes a profound change in the character of warfare.
Terrorism is greatly aided by two recent developments, England said: globalization, which makes it possible to move people, goods and ideas quickly anywhere in the world; and increasingly powerful, increasingly cheap technology, such as global positioning systems and night-vision equipment, which makes it possible for terrorists to fight sophisticated enemies.
The United States has responded with its own technology, from radiation detectors and cargo-scanning machines at border crossings to biometric identification credentials for foreign visitors, he said.
The Homeland Security Department also has created two centers for merging and analyzing intelligence; hired thousands of baggage screeners and sky marshals; and provided $4 billion to local authorities to better equip police, firefighters and other first responders to respond to terrorism, England said.
But much remains to be done, and much of it must be done by the private sector, he said. Private companies own 85 percent of critical U.S. infrastructure, from energy production to financial systems, transportation to agriculture.
England said meetings with industry leaders have convinced him that they are taking appropriate steps to protect the infrastructure. To a large degree, President Bush's administration is relying on market forces to ensure that defensive steps are taken. Investors will invest and employees will work where companies have taken steps to protect themselves against terrorism, he said.

Notes

1 COLOR PHOTO

Load-Date: June 18, 2004


End of Document