U.S. READY TO LIFT LEBANON TRAVEL BAN
Pittsburgh Post-Gazette (Pennsylvania)
July 30, 1997, Wednesday,
SOONER EDITION


Copyright 1997 P.G. Publishing Co.
Section: WORLD,
Length: 308 words
Byline: PATRICK WORSNIP, REUTERS NEWS SERVICE
Dateline: WASHINGTON
Body


The United States is on the verge of lifting a 12-year-old ban on U.S. citizens visiting Lebanon, provided Beirut pledges to do more to fight terrorism, a senior State Department official said yesterday.
The official said Secretary of State Madeleine Albright had not made a final decision but was ''inclined to lift the restriction providing there are positive steps by the Lebanese.''
Albright was expected to take action in the next 24 hours, said the official. Secretaries of state review the ban every six months, a deadline that falls due tomorrow.
The ban, imposed in 1985 after Muslim zealots hijacked a TWA airliner to Beirut and killed an American passenger, is not watertight, barring American citizens only from using their U.S. passports to visit Lebanon.
It is based on a judgment that Americans face a serious security threat in Lebanon, especially from pro-Iranian Hizbollah guerrillas who remain at large there. The claim is disputed by the Lebanese government.
The U.S. official said steps Lebanon could take to fight terrorism included having its parliament approve the last of 10 covenants on terrorism and hostage-taking, and designating an envoy to discuss anti-terrorism moves with a U.S. team.
The official said that Albright, who is traveling in Asia, had telephoned Lebanese Prime Minister Rafik al-Hariri earlier yesterday to ask for increased cooperation and was expected to make further contacts before announcing a decision.
He said that if the ban was lifted, it was expected to be replaced by a strong travel warning telling Americans that Lebanon was still a dangerous place in which the U.S. Embassy had only limited scope for helping them.
 
That would put Lebanon in a category with such countries as Sudan, Afghanistan, Algeria, Colombia and Iran, instead of bracketing it with Iraq and Libya, to which travel is banned.

Load-Date: August 1, 1997


End of Document