U.S. CLINIC BOMBINGS INQUIRY NOW PLEASING MORE GROUPS
The New York Times
January 20, 1985, Sunday, Late City Final Edition


Copyright 1985 The New York Times Company
Section: Section 1; Part 1; Page 24, Column 5; National Desk
Length: 684 words
Byline: By LESLIE MAITLAND WERNER
Dateline: WASHINGTON, Jan. 19
Body


Leaders of several groups concerned about the bombings of abortion clinics around the country say they are now satisfied with the efforts of the Federal law-enforcement authorities.
 In recent months the Federal Bureau of Investigation has been assailed by several leaders of the groups that support women's right to abortion for not mounting a nationwide terrorism investigation into the bombings. But now some of the leaders say they no longer seek greater involvement of the F.B.I.
Barbara A. Radford, executive director of the National Abortion Federation, which represents 284 abortion service groups around the country, said, ''In terms of the arson and the bombings, we feel the Feds are doing everything they can do.''
She attributed her change of position on the F.B.I.'s role to concerns raised by the American Civil Liberties Union and her satisfaction with the investigation by the Bureau of Alcohol, Tobacco and Firearms, which has jurisdiction. The A.C.L.U. has said an F.B.I. investigation of the cases could set a precedent for opening wide-ranging inquiries about other domestic groups.
National Abortion Federation and other abortion rights groups express satisfaction with FBI investigations of bombings of clinics around nation, suggesting FBI and Bureau of Alcohol, Tobacco and Firearms have responded positively to earlier concerns (S)
Mrs. Radford said she was pleased with the work of the firearms bureau in investigating the clinic violence and said she now believed it should retain primary authority for the investigations.
 
Some Groups Disagree
Her views were largely shared by Fredrica Hodges, executive director of the Religious Coalition for Abortion Rights, and Frances Kissling, executive director of Catholics for a Free Choice. But Faye Wattleton, president of the Planned Parenthood Federation, and Judy Goldsmith, president of the National Organization for Women, disagreed.
Miss Goldsmith and Miss Wattleton said they still believed the F.B.I. should open a full-scale investigation into terrorism against the abortion clinics.
In December, the bureau's Director, William H. Webster, was sharply criticized by groups favoring abortion rights for saying the bureau did not regard the abortion clinic bombings as within its definition of terrorism.
For the bureau to conduct a investigation, Mr. Webster said, there would have to be some evidence that the bombings were the work of a definable group, bent on using violence for a political or social end.
Because no evidence existed that a single group could be held responsible, the F.B.I. said, the Bureau of Alcohol, Tobacco and Firearms assumed jurisdiction, as required by a memorandum of understanding setting out each agency's authority.
Mrs. Radford of the National Abortion Federation said: ''We've learned a lot about law enforcement. We don't believe any longer that the F.B.I should be the lead agency as it relates to arson and bombing.''
She added that she believed the F.B.I. was ''working quite diligently'' to provide assistance in the inquiries and that she did not believe it should open a terrorism investigation in connection with the bombing.
 
F.B.I. Is Called Correct
Jerry Berman, legislative counsel to the civil liberties union, maintained that the F.B.I. was correct in saying it lacked authority for a domestic security or terrorism investigation as long as no specific group could be linked to the clinic bombings.
''Without an identifiable group, we risk having the F.B.I. starting an intelligence investigation of lawful activity,'' Mr. Berman said.
Mr. Berman and Mrs. Radford, and the other representatives of groups favoring abortion rights, attended a meeting Wednesday with officials of both law-enforcement agencies.
They both said they were satified with the commitment of the firearms bureau of 500 of its 1,200 special agents to the bombings, and with the level of assistance provided by the F.B.I.
However, Miss Goldsmith said that ''a full-scale investigation by all relevant Federal agencies'' was needed immediately and should draw more heavily on the resources of the F.B.I. Miss Wattleton agreed.

Graphic

 
Photo of bomb scare scene


End of Document