U.S. no longer testing nuclear plants on terrorism;

The Tampa Tribune (Florida)
November 3, 1998, Tuesday,
FINAL EDITION


Copyright 1998 The Tribune Co. Publishes The Tampa Tribune
Section: NATION/WORLD,
Length: 421 words
Byline: Compiled from Tribune wires;
Body


The federal government has eliminated its only program for testing the ability of commercial  nuclear power plants to repel armed terrorists - part of a cost-cutting reorganization of the U.S.  Nuclear Regulatory Commission.
Established in 1991, the program, while small, had identified serious security lapses at nearly  half the nation's 104 nuclear power reactors.
Some in the nuclear power industry complained the program was too costly, although others had  praised the program for improving their security.
Supreme Court agrees to decide when gifts constitute crimes
WASHINGTON - The Supreme Court is entering the world of Washington lobbying, agreeing Monday to  decide when a gift or a special favor for a government official turns into a federal crime.
The special prosecutor who is investigating gifts made to former Agriculture Secretary Mike Espy  asked the court to rule that it is a crime to provide anything of value to an official solely  because of that official's position in the government.
A federal appeals court ruled in March that a gift is illegal only when it rewards some specific  action. The Supreme Court decision could come next year.  Genetically engineered drug enters market for rheumatoid arthritis
WASHINGTON - A genetically engineered drug won government approval Monday to help some of the  hardest-to-treat sufferers of rheumatoid arthritis.
Immunex Corp.'s Enbrel can fight debilitating symptoms in advanced rheumatoid arthritis patients  with fewer serious side effects than older therapies. Immunex said Enbrel will be on pharmacy  shelves within days. Patients require injections of the drug twice weekly, costing about $ 220 a  week.
Rheumatoid arthritis afflicts more than 2 million Americans. Different from the more common  arthritis attributed to the wear-and-tear of aging, rheumatoid arthritis occurs when patients'  immune systems attack their joints, causing inflammation and stiffness as rogue immune cells erode  cartilage and bone.  Houston fires 6 police officers involved in botched drug raid
HOUSTON - Six police officers were fired Monday for their involvement in the fatal shooting of a  man during a botched drug raid.
Pedro Oregon, 22, was killed July 12 after the officers, acting on an informant's tip, stormed  his apartment in search of drugs. Police fired 33 bullets, hitting Oregon a dozen times - nine times  in the back.
No drugs were found; the officers said they thought Oregon shot at them. The shot that hit an  officer's bulletproof vest was fired by another officer.

Notes

IN BRIEF NEWS OF THE NATION

Load-Date: November 4, 1998


End of Document