U.S. Must Be Consistent With Stand on Terrorism
University Wire
August 31, 1998


Copyright 1998 Daily Utah Chronicle via U-Wire
Length: 756 words
Byline: By Alexis Wood, Daily Utah Chronicle
Dateline: Salt Lake City, Utah
Body


"We must not allow sanctuary for terrorism-not for terrorists or for their money," President Clinton adamantly stated last week after ordering an attack on two alleged terrorist facilities in Sudan and Afghanistan.
 Drawing upon a collection of intelligence reports ranging from satellite images to the Psychic Friends Network, administration officials concluded that their targets were strategic headquarters for a band of radical Islamic assassins.
 From these locations, Osama bin Laden, the sugar-daddy of anti-American sentiment, has financed, trained and dispatched a series of terrorists, apparently including those responsible for the recent embassy bombings in Kenya and Tanzania. These devastating explosions killed over 300 people, and the perpetrators of such abhorrent brutality certainly deserve severe punishment.
U. Utah
This is not the first time the United States led the charge against covert and destabilizing forces.
 Although past attempts to prevent terrorism were openly directed against other sovereign nations, they were not considered terrorist acts.
 That term is traditionally reserved for the torture, rape, kidnapping and execution of civilians in order to impose a state of fear upon an entire population. These brutal techniques are used to gain and maintain political power without regard for human rights or international law. Recent history is laden with examples of such mutilation and murder. It was spread throughout El Salvador by Roberto D' Aubuisson, whose death squads slaughtered thousands of students, teachers, community activists, unionists, clergy and indigenous people. In Bolivia, Hugo Banzar Suarez butchered his own citizens and sheltered Nazi war criminals. Argentine dictator Leopoldo Gatieri conducted vast campaigns of assassination and torture in what is euphemistically called the "dirty little war."
 Most Americans are at least somewhat familiar with these facts; however, most are unaware that the perpetrators were trained on U.S. soil and at taxpayers' expense. The U.S. Army's School of the Americas is a compound used since 1946 to train Latin American militaries. Originally in Panama, the facility was relocated to Georgia when the Panamanian government declared it a threat to democracy.
 The compound is commonly referred to as the "school of assassins" because it has produced the soldiers and dictators responsible for the bloodiest massacres in Central and South America. The curriculum includes motivation by fear, false imprisonment, interrogation, guerrilla combat techniques, and other methods of repression. The Pentagon confirmed this in 1996 when instruction manuals were leaked to the press.
 Originally designed to combat communism, the compound's postwar agenda is to control drug trafficking. Besides the above-listed dictators, the school's alumni include the soldiers who murdered six Jesuit priests in El Salvador in 1986 and raped and murdered two Salvadorian nuns in 1980, and the assassins of Archbishop Oscar Romero. Other alumni include those responsible for coups overthrowing constitutionally elected civilian governments in Haiti, Peru, Columbia and Guatemala. All these regimes commit atrocities against their citizens while the United States continues to provide the arms and education.
 Despite increased public protest, the institution continues to operate at an annual cost of between $ 18 million and $ 43 million (numbers vary depending upon the source).
 Rep. Joseph Kennedy has repeatedly submitted legislation to close the school by cutting its budget. Although this has continually been voted down, the idea is gaining momentum as the public gains awareness. The latest bill (HR 601) was sent to the National Security Committee, which will determine if it will move on to floor debate and a House vote or swept under the rug once again.
 Our own esteemed Congressman Jim Hansen sits on the National Security Committee. Here is an opportunity for honesty and action, a chance to end our own tragic legacy of terror in the Americas.
 If the United States is sincerely interested in combating forces of instability, brutality and unrest, we must stop excusing our own acts of terrorism as statecraft and strategic defense.
 If we want global support while we're dispatching cruise missiles across the globe, we must cease financing mercenaries in our own backyard. Let us hold our leaders to a standard of consistency between our national rhetoric and our actions.
(C) 1999 Daily Utah Chronicle via U-WIRE

Load-Date: February 2, 1999


End of Document