U.S. OFFICIALS DISAGREE ABOUT SOUTH AFRICAN GROUP, TERRORISM
St. Louis Post-Dispatch (Missouri)
January 15, 1989, SUNDAY, THREE STAR Edition


Copyright 1989 St. Louis Post-Dispatch, Inc.
Section: NEWS; Pg. 5A
Length: 534 words
Body


WASHINGTON (AP) - State Department officials are debating whether members of the African National Congress are terrorists or legitimate freedom-fighters.  The internal argument arose after the inclusion of the South African black group in a book, ''Terrorist Group Profiles,'' issued last week by the Department of Defense.  Officially, spokesmen for both departments said they agreed that the African National Congress should be in the book.  But Charles E. Redman, a State Department spokesman, said: ''That was an information document. It's not meant to be a policy publication.'' Within the State Department, counterterrorism officials disagreed with diplomats concerned with maintaining ties to South Africa's black majority.  The section on the African National Congress, one of 50 groups in the Defense Department compilation, says the group's indiscriminate attacks on civilians in recent years could endanger Americans caught in the cross fire.  A Pentagon spokesman said the group had been included because authorities wanted to warn Americans of the danger from the African National Congress and other groups around the world.  The spokesman, Lt. Cmdr. Jim Kudla, said the book had been ''fully coordinated'' with the State Department.  The office of counterterrorism at the State Department concurred that the inclusion of the African National Congress had been approved. The office said that while the group was ''a political guerrilla organization, it also has used terrorist tactics.'' Redman said, ''There's no question that certain (African National Congress) acts . . . would be considered terrorist acts.'' But he also read a statement prepared by the department's Africa Affairs Bureau that says ''the United States government has not determined that the (African National Congress) is a terrorist organizatio n.'' The statement adds that ''we regard the (African National Congress) as a politically diverse organization . . . with substantial political support in South Africa.
Some of (its) political objectives, such as ending apartheid and establishing a non-racial government in South Africa are goals we share.  ''We strongly differ with the (group) on some of the methods they have used to pursue these objectives, including the use of violence.'' Despite periodically condemning the African National Congress' car bombings and other attacks, Secretary of State George P. Shultz met in January 1987 with Oliver Tambo, who heads the group. And State Department officials maintain contacts with the group.  The African National Congress also has support among liberals in Congress, but conservatives condemn the group as a communist organization armed by the Soviet Union.  The Pentagon book says the African National Congress is armed with Soviet weapons and gets most of its training in Angola, which is Marxist-oriented.  In 1960, South Africa banned the then-peaceful African National Congress; one year later, the group began a sabotage campaign. In recent years the group's attacks have expanded to include random bombings in fast-food restaurants and bus depots.  There have been 180 bombings in South Africa over the past 31 months, killing 35 people and injuring at least 665.

Load-Date: October 23, 1993


End of Document