U.S. retaliation to terrorists is warranted
INTELLIGENCER JOURNAL (LANCASTER, PA.)
September 5, 1998, Saturday


Copyright 1998 Lancaster Newspapers, Inc.
Section: LIFESTYLE,; FREESTYLE
Length: 747 words
Byline: Eva Harman, 17 Freestyle Writer
Body


The recent brutal displays of terrorism against United States embassies in Kenya and Tanzania may seem far away from us, but who doesn't occasionally feel a pang of fear boarding a plane?
We are threatened not by an individual country, but rather by groups of individuals who believe terror is the method to accomplish their religious and political goals. This renders our war against terrorism all the more complicated. We have no specific country to target, only loose affiliations of individuals. How do we target these terrorists without killing too many innocent people? Should we pursue legal justice through the international arena? Or is it right to undertake military action that could violate the sovereignty of nations where terrorists dwell? Can we claim that an individual is responsible for the attacks?
#EVA.FS;2#
There is a strong likelihood that there will be an increase in acts of terrorism like those in Africa. We'll just have to see what works best to combat terrorism.
Shortly before the American response, Osama bin Laden, a man the United States links to the bombings in Africa, contacted a Pakistani newspaper, The News, to voice his opinion. This newspaper said bin Laden called for the Muslim community to pursue a holy war against Jews and Americans to liberate their holy places. At the same time, he denied responsibility in the attacks in Nairobi and Dar es-Salaam (Le Monde). This type of contradiction and obfuscation is characteristic of terrorists.
I don't quite know what to think about the American missile attacks in Sudan and Afghanistan. On the one hand, retaliating in such a violent, destructive, rapid manner escalates the situation. The cycle has begun; Washington already anticipates future acts of terrorism. Even our good old Washington Monument is being encircled, for security reasons, by blocks of concrete, according to a New York Times article. Also, other nations question the unprecedented speed of the response. The attacks may very well serve to unite anti-American Islamic leftist groups. This is demonstrated by the bombing on Aug. 25 of a Planet Hollywood in South Africa. The group Muslims Against Global Oppression claimed responsibility, according to a recent article in the Lancaster Intelligencer Journal.
Take a look at Northern Ireland. Here the public outcry in response to a bombing by a splinter group of the IRA, the so-called real IRA, was sufficient to lead two splinter groups to call a cease-fire. The assault on the United States is, of course, on a completely different scale. Yet, if the United States had refrained from such a violent response, the very fact that the majority of victims of the terrorist bombings were Africans could have led individuals to see the absurdity of terrorism. Is blatant force the way to go?
On the other hand, it is reassuring to know the U.S. military can jump to our defense with such speed. We are challenging those involved in the bombings of our embassies to mortal tit-for-tat. The United States' strikes will not necessarily deter future attacks, but they do demonstrate that we will respond to acts of terrorism. After all, the terrorists assaulted U.S. embassies. That's a direct attack that could only be surmounted by one on our own soil. Comforting fact? No.
What is even more threatening is the prospect of the Islamic fanatics sponsoring more extremist acts of terrorism.
Another factor in support of our retaliation in Sudan and Afghanistan is that the United States has had little success in the lengthy process of tracking down terrorists and bringing them to justice through legal means. For instance, Aug. 26, 10 years after the bombing of Pan Am Flight 103 over Scotland, the two Libyan men believed to be responsible are going to be tried in the Netherlands, according to a recent article in the Lancaster Intelligencer Journal. Also, there is little hope that the Taliban, an Islamic group which controls most of Afghanistan, would acquiesce in extraditing Osama bin Laden to the United Staes for a trial, because bin Laden carries a heavy purse, donating an estimated 10 million a year to the Taliban movement, according to the The New York Times.
Frankly, it appalls me to think that our generation will be confronted by more acts of this sort. My 17-year-old brain does not yet contain a word that adequately describes how I feel about terrorism. And what's worse; there does not appear to be any near-to-perfect method to deter those _ well _ stupid terrorists!

Load-Date: October 14, 1999


End of Document