U.S. tries to save Mideast talks
Deseret News (Salt Lake City)
April 2, 1997, Wednesday


Copyright 1997 The Deseret News Publishing Co.
Section: NEWS;
Length: 816 words
Byline: Associated Press
Body


WASHINGTON -- President Clinton, hoping Mideast peacemaking can rebound from a new round of violence, will meet here next week with Israeli Prime Minister Benjamin Netanyahu on a proposal for fast-track negotiations with the Palestinians.
The visit was announced Tuesday after Clinton called on Palestinian leader Yasser Arafat to declare ''zero tolerance'' for terrorism. Clinton said a serious effort to stop attacks on civilians was a condition for successful negotiations.
In the West Bank Wednesday, a firebomb smashed the front windshield of a truck carrying Israeli soldiers, sending it tumbling down a slope near a Palestinian refugee camp, the army said. Thirteen people were hurt. The truck came to a stop on its side just a few yards from the first homes of Jel-a-zoun, a camp about 12 miles north of Jerusalem. Smoke was still rising from the wreckage nearly an hour later.
''There has to be an attitude of zero tolerance, a determination to do all that can reasonably be done to maintain the peace, so that then negotiated progress can be made,'' Clinton said. ''And that's what the United States expects, and that's what we will continue to press for.''
His appeal was prompted by a failed suicide bombing attempt Tuesday in Gaza that was denounced by the State Department. Recalling the bleak prospects for peace last fall after a spate of anti-Israel terrorism, spokesman Nicholas Burns said an agreement nonetheless emerged on Hebron, the West Bank town Israel has turned over in large part to the Palestinian Authority.
''We certainly are not in a position or inclined to give up,'' he said.
No one claimed responsibility for Wednesday's attack. Troops imposed a curfew on the Jelazoun camp and searched the surrounding hills for suspects.
Palestinian police on Wednesday detained 30 people, most followers of the militant Islamic Jihad group, in connection with Tuesday's bombings, which claimed only the two bombers. Thirteen people were released after questioning, Palestinian officials said.
Two Palestinians also were shot to death Tuesday by Israeli troops in the West Bank.
Clinton, while meeting Tuesday with Jordan's King Hussein, said, ''I don't believe there is an excuse for terrorism in any case. I believe terrorism is always wrong.''
Netanyahu is looking for Clinton's backing as he tries to persuade Arafat to agree to an accelerated schedule for resolving disputes over Jerusalem, Palestinian statehood aspirations, refugees and other touchy issues within six to nine months.
Netanyahu also has proposed a summit meeting with Arafat, but White House spokesman Mike McCurry said, ''I haven't seen a discussion related to a hypothetical summit emerge.''
Clinton said he would send Secretary of State Madeleine Albright on a diplomatic mission to the Middle East ''at the right time'' but otherwise gave no hint of the strategy he would adopt to put negotiations back on track.
''I certainly want her to go,'' the president said. ''I want her to be a part of a clear strategy designed to produce progress.''
Albright was meeting at the State Department Wednesday with Hussein before going to Baltimore to make the ceremonial first pitch at the Orioles' opening game with the Kansas City Royals.
Netanyahu, meanwhile, plans to meet Clinton next Monday. Israeli Embassy spokesman Gadi Baltiansky said Netanyahu would see Clinton during a one-day visit to Washington to speak to the pro-Israel lobby, American Israel Public Affairs Committee.
Clinton consulted with U.S. me-di-a-tor Dennis Ross Monday as violence appeared to be subsiding. But Tuesday, the failed suicide bombing attempt occurred. Besides killing the two bombers, several other Arabs were wounded, Palestinian police said.
Israel radio said the bombers apparently had timed the attacks to the travel schedule of buses carrying Jewish schoolchildren.
Last week, as Ross was sent to see Arafat in Morocco and Net-an-ya-hu in Jerusalem, Al-bright and other administration officials insisted that Arafat flash an unmistakable ''red light'' to terrorists.
A suicide bomber attacked a cafe in Tel Aviv on March 21, killing three women and injuring dozens of other patrons. The attack and demonstrations by rock-hurling Palestinians on the West Bank followed an Israeli Cabinet decision to begin constructing housing units for 6,500 Jews in east Jerusalem.
Arafat is determined to establish a Palestinian state with Jerusalem its capital, while Net-an-ya-hu insists that all of Jerusalem will be Israel's eternal capital.
Clinton said Arafat had taken some steps he found encouraging.
''But,'' the president said, ''unambiguously, a precondition of going forward is a commitment to zero tolerance for terrorism, for making the best effort.''
McCurry said Arafat had reaffirmed his abhorrence of terrorism, but, he said, ''there's more that certainly the chairman could do, more that we all could do, in the fight against terrorism.''

Load-Date: April 3, 1998


End of Document