U.S. still on alert for security threats Authorities had 'routine weekend'
USA TODAY
January 3, 2000, Monday,
FINAL EDITION


Copyright 2000 Gannett Company, Inc.
Section: NEWS;
Length: 533 words
Byline: Kevin Johnson
Dateline: WASHINGTON
Body


WASHINGTON -- Although the new millennium arrived with general
calm, authorities are still pursuing details about an alleged
far-flung conspiracy by Algerian terrorism suspects who were arrested
in the USA just before the new year.
At least a dozen people, many of them Algerian, remained in federal
custody across the country Sunday, including Abdel Ghani, 31,
whom the FBI arrested late last week in Brooklyn, N.Y.
Ghani is accused of being an accomplice to terrorism suspect Ahmed
Ressam, who was found with powerful bomb-making materials on Dec.
14 while attempting to enter Washington state from Canada.
Based upon documents seized from Ressam and a discarded ticket
for a flight from Seattle to New York, authorities claim that
Ghani was planning to meet Ressam in Seattle about the time U.S.
border guards arrested Ressam.
Federal court documents supporting Ghani's detention show that
authorities are pursuing a suspected "network of Algerian nationals"
with alleged terrorist intentions.
Ghani was arrested only hours after prosecutors linked a Canadian
woman -- who was arrested five days after Ressam on immigrant-smuggling
charges -- with a violent cell of the Armed Islamic Group. Authorities
contend that Ressam is a member of the same cell.
Although officials said they knew of no specific target of terrorism,
the FBI swept through several cities late last week, including
New York, Dallas and Los Angeles, to interview Algerian immigrants
who might have information related to Ressam.
Some interviews resulted in arrests on immigration-related violations.
By the end of the FBI operation Friday, 15 people were being detained.
FBI spokesman Steve Berry said Sunday that the investigation is
continuing.
Anxiety about possible millennium-related terrorism reached its
peak with Ressam's arrest, prompting officials in Seattle to cancel
part of the city's New Year's Eve celebration.
Across the country, the most policed holiday observance in U.S.
history passed as one of the most peaceful.
It was so quiet, in fact, that Dave Branham, a spokesman for the
U.S. Marshals Service, which is responsible for security at the
nation's federal buildings, said that when he awoke at 4:15 a.m.
on New Year's Day, he made sure his pager was still working.
"A lot of preparation is why we are sitting where we are right
now," Branham said.
"The kind of precautions we saw law enforcement take were unprecedented,"
said California State University criminal justice professor Brian
Levin. "Authorities do have a grasp that there is some risk out
there. They responded in the most responsible way they could."
Even with the general calm, the watch for possible disruptions
continued Sunday at the FBI's 56 field offices.
"It's safe to say that an adequate number of people are still
on duty," Berry said.
The Immigration and Naturalization Service, on alert after attempted
border breaches by terrorists, saw a "routine weekend" pass
at posts across the country.
There was one report of New Year's Eve gunfire on U.S. border
guards north of Detroit, but there were no injuries, and the gunman
fled into Canada.
INS spokesman Russ Bergeron said the guards did not return fire.
"Unfortunately, these types of things are a regular occurrence,"
Bergeron said.

Graphic

 
PHOTO, b/w, Jane Rosenberg, AP; Terrorism suspect: This drawing shows Abdel Ghani, second from right, being arraigned in U.S. District Court in New York on Friday.

Load-Date: January 3, 2000


End of Document