U.S. ATTORNEY GENERAL; Barr: 'No reason' for special counsel for Biden son, election
The Atlanta Journal-Constitution
December 22, 2020 Tuesday
Main Edition


Copyright 2020 The Atlanta Journal-Constitution


Section: NEWS; Pg. 3A
Length: 500 words
Byline: Staff
Highlight: Two days before he steps down, Attorney General William Barr distanced himself again from President Donald Trump on Monday, saying he saw no reason to appoint special counsels to oversee the Justice Department's ongoing criminal investigation into Hunter Biden, son of President-elect Joe Biden, or to investigate Trump's baseless claims of widespread voter fraud.
Body


At a news conference to announce charges in an unrelated terrorism case, Barr said that he did not "see any reason to appoint a special counsel" to oversee the ongoing tax investigation into the younger Biden.
"I have no plan to do so before I leave," Barr said. "To the extent that there is an investigation, I think that it's being handled responsibly and professionally."
He also said that he would name a special counsel to oversee an inquiry into election fraud if he felt one was warranted. "But I haven't and I'm not going to," Barr said.
In the wake of Trump's loss to Biden, the president and his allies have cast doubt on the validity of the outcome and sought to overturn it. Barr's statements, in his final days on the job, seemed to signal that there is no appetite at the Justice Department to be drawn into those efforts.
What might be next
But it is unclear how much pressure Trump might put on Barr's replacement, Deputy Attorney General Jeffrey Rosen, who will lead the department on an acting basis for the remaining weeks of the president's term and whose approach to dealing with Trump is unknown.
At a minimum, Barr's statements on Monday gives Rosen cover not to appoint special counsels to look into voter fraud or Hunter Biden, and would make the optics of any decision to go ahead with such appointments more difficult for both Rosen and Trump.
Rosen has not signaled his specific intentions. But he has held discussions about the ramifications of appointing a special counsel to oversee the investigation into Hunter Biden, according to a person familiar with those conversations who is not authorized to publicly discuss them.
He said in an interview with Reuters last week that he would make decisions on all issues, including the potential appointment of a special counsel, "on the basis of the law and the facts."
About Barr
Long regarded as Trump's most loyal and effective Cabinet member, Barr, a believer in strong presidential power, brought the Justice Department closer to the White House than any attorney general since John Mitchell, who ran Richard Nixon's reelection campaign and was deeply involved in Watergate.
In handling the special counsel's investigation into the intersection of Russia and Trump's 2016 campaign, Barr ultimately concluded that the president had not obstructed justice, despite his efforts to shut down the inquiry. The Justice Department's independent inspector general found that the senior officials at the bureau had sufficient reason to open the investigation. A judge later called Barr's summary of the report by the special counsel, Robert Mueller, misleading.
Convinced that the FBI had overstepped its authority in investigating the Trump campaign, Barr asked a federal prosecutor, John H. Durham, to look into the origins of the Russia investigation. In October the attorney general appointed him to be a special counsel with a mandate to continue exploring whether the inquiry was wrongfully opened.
Katie Benner,
c.2020 The New York Times

Load-Date: February 5, 2021


End of Document