U.S. Probing LeT-Jamaat Links: Bangladesh Law Minister
RTT News (United States)
March 17, 2010 Wednesday


Copyright 2010 NoticiasFinancieras/Grupo de Diarios America All Rights Reserved
Length: 330 words
Body


(RTTNews) - The United States is probing links between Bangladesh&apos;s Islamist party Jamaat-e-Islami and Pakistan-based terrorist organization Lashkar-e-Toiba (LeT), Dhaka&apos;s law minister Shafique Ahmed said Tuesday.
Briefing reporters in capital Dhaka after his 10-day visit to the U.S., Ahmed said the Obama administration would particularly try to trace the financers of terror outfits in the country.
The U,S, has also promised to assist Bangladesh in combating militancy and terrorism and train its elite Rapid Action Battalion (RAB) and other paramilitary forces to enhance their professional skills, the minister added.
Ahmed reportedly discussed many issues, including money-laundering, identifying the financial sources of militant organizations, and mutual assistance in combating terrorism during talks with top officials of the Department of Justice, the Department of Treasury, the Department of State and the Attorney-General.
The law minister&apos;s comment on LeT-Jamaat links assumes particular significance in the wake of concerns expressed by American lawmakers, think-tanks and experts to the U.S. Congress about the LeT&apos;s transformation as a trans-regional force spreading its influence to many countries outside South Asia where its terrorists were initially confined.
Bangladesh police arrested more than four suspected LeT operatives last year, in Dhaka and the port city of Chittagong. The police said the LeT members were plotting to attack Indian and U.S. embassies in that country.
The LeT, which has been blamed for the 2008 Mumbai terror carnage and the 2001 attack on Indian Parliament, is believed to have the active support of the Pakistan army and the country&apos;s intelligence agency, the ISI, as also the Federal government in carrying out terror attacks on India as well as against Indian interests in some neighboring countries.
For comments and feedback: contact editorial@rttnews.com
Copyright(c) 2010 RTTNews.com, Inc. All Rights Reserved

Load-Date: April 9, 2010


End of Document