U.S. URGES ITS CITIZENS TO REMAIN WATCHFUL FOR TERRORISM;
SECURITY IS TIGHTENED AT BORDERS
St. Louis Post-Dispatch (Missouri)
December 21, 1999, Tuesday, FIVE STAR LIFT EDITION


Copyright 1999 St. Louis Post-Dispatch, Inc.
Section: NEWS, Pg. A1
Length: 472 words
Byline: The Associated Press
Dateline: WASHINGTON
Body


Despite the arrest of a man trying to smuggle explosive materials into Washington state aboard a ferry from Canada, U.S. authorities know of no specific terrorist threats against domestic targets, President Bill Clinton's national security adviser said Monday.
But the arrest and suspicions that the man may be linked to terrorist groups prompted officials to heighten security and to caution Americans to watch out during the holiday season for signs of terrorist activities.
And the U.S. Customs Service has said it is putting 300 extra inspectors at high-priority entry points.
Sandy Berger, the president's national security adviser, said U.S. authorities were investigating what plans Ahmed Ressam may have had for the nitroglycerin and other potential bomb-making materials in his car when he was arrested in Port Angeles, Wash., after taking a ferry last week from Victoria, British Columbia.
Speaking to reporters, Berger urged Americans to be vigilant as they plan New Year's activities but also said officials knew of no specific threats against targets in the United States.
James Foley, a State Department spokesman, said it was too early to know whether Ressam was a member of a terrorist group.
"Obviously, they're looking into his motivation, his intentions, whether he had accomplices and whether he was part of a wider network and is affiliated with international terrorist groups," Foley said.
Foley noted that the State Department recently cautioned Americans abroad to be especially careful.
"We've indicated that we have information that terrorists are undertaking planning for attacks during the New Year period" overseas, Foley said. "It is obviously particularly important now for there to be maximum vigilance."
Joe Lockhart, the White House press secretary, said Clinton had been briefed on counterterrorism efforts in the pre-New Year's period, including Ressam's capture.
"We have ongoing efforts that look at both international terrorism and protecting against domestic terrorism," Lockhart said. "That work is something that the president has closely involved himself in and has done a lot of work on."
At a ceremony in Washington honoring the four customs agents who apprehended Ressam last week, Customs Commissioner Raymond Kelly said he was putting an extra 300 inspectors on duty at various points of entry, wit h particular attention to "remote ports."
Kelly did not say where the additional inspectors would be or how long the extra force would be on station. He said 300 would be added through overtime or by shifting people to high priority stations.
The additional inspectors will allow the Customs Service to question more people entering the United States at airports, seaports and road crossings, Kelly said.
About 460 million people come into the United States each year through 301 points of entry.     

Graphic

 
PHOTO THE ASSOCIATED PRESS Photo - Cars wait to enter Blaine, Wash., at the U.S.-Canada border Monday after an increase in security ties up traffic. The capture of a suspected terrorist has put officials on alert.

Load-Date: December 21, 1999


End of Document