U.S., U.K. close embassies in Yemen
The Salt Lake Tribune
January 3, 2010 Sunday


Copyright 2010 The Salt Lake Tribune All Rights Reserved
Section: NEWS; National; World
Length: 505 words
Byline: By Anne Gearan And Lee Keath The Associated Press
Body


San'a, Yemen » Western embassies in Yemen locked up Sunday after fresh threats from al-Qaida, and the White House expressed alarm at the terror group's expanded reach in the poor Arab nation where an offshoot apparently ordered the Christmas Day plot against a U.S. airliner.
President Barack Obama's top counterterrorism adviser, John Brennan, cited "indications al-Qaida is planning to carry out an attack against a target" in the capital, possibly the embassy, and estimated the group had several hundred members in Yemen. Security reasons led Britain to act, too; it was not known when the embassies would reopen.
The U.S. is worried about the spread of terrorism in Yemen, a U.S. ally and aid recipient, Brennan said, but doesn't consider the country a second front with Afghanistan and Pakistan in the fight against terrorism.
As to whether U.S. troops might be sent to Yemen, Brennan replied: "We're not talking about that at this point at all." He pledged to provide the Yemeni government with "the wherewithal" to take down al-Qaida.
Britain and the United States are assisting a counterterrorism police unit in Yemen as fears grow about the increasing threat of international terrorism originating from the country.
The Obama administration claims that the suspect in the plot against the Detroit-bound plane was trained and armed by the al-Qaida affiliate in Yemen.
The Transportation Security Administration announced Sunday that, starting today, passengers flying into the United States from Nigeria, Yemen and other "countries of interest" will be subject to enhanced screening techniques, such as body scans and pat-downs.
Yemen is a poor, decentralized and predominantly Muslim country on the Arabian Peninsula. It is the ancestral homeland of al-Qaida leader Osama bin Laden, and the site of the 2000 bombing of the USS Cole, which killed 17 U.S. sailors. A 2008 attack on the U.S. Embassy killed one American.
Given the active threat from al-Qaida, "we're not going to take any chances," Brennan said from Washington. --
Christmas Day attempt, detainee releases
No 'smoking gun' » U.S. intelligence agencies did not miss a "smoking gun" that could have prevented an alleged attempt to blow up a U.S. airliner on Christmas Day, President Barack Obama's top counterterrorism adviser said Sunday. White House aide John Brennan cited "lapses" and errors in the sharing of intelligence and clues about the Nigerian man accused in the foiled attempt. "There is no smoking gun," Brennan said. "There was no single piece of intelligence that said, 'this guy is going to get on a plane.' "
Guantanamo detainees » Some Democratic lawmakers who support closing Guantanamo Bay say the U.S. should reconsider whether to repatriate suspected terrorists from Yemen, given the al-Qaida activity in the poor Arab nation. Rep. Jane Harman, D-Calif., a member of the Homeland Security Committee, said Sunday that officials should review the transfers. She does support plans to close the prison and open one in Illinois for terrorism suspects.

Graphic

 
FILE - A Yemeni soldier stands guard in front of the main entrance of the US Embassy while two workers repair the gate in the background, in the capital San'a, Yemen, in this Sept. 18, 2008 file photo. A statement posted on Sunday Jan. 3, 2009 on the embassy Web site said it had closed but provided no further details. (AP Photo/Nasser Nasser, File)
FILE - In this Wednesday, Dec. 3, 2008 file photo, Pastor Rick Warren signs his book "The Purpose of Christmas" at Barnes & Noble bookstore in New York. Evangelical pastor Rick Warren says his call for donations to fill a $900,000 deficit at his Southern California megachurch has brought in $2.4 million. (AP Photo/Charles Sykes, file)
Yemeni soldiers on top of a truck patrol the road in front of the main entrance of the US Embassy in the capital San'a, Yemen in this Sept. 18, 2008 file photo. A statement posted on Sunday Jan. 3, 2010 on the embassy Web site said it had closed but provided no further details. (AP Photo/Nasser Nasser, File)
FILE - A Yemeni security armored vehicle patrol in the capital San'a, Yemen, in this June 15, 2009 file photo. The British government said Sunday Jan. 3, 2010 that Prime Minister Gordon Brown and President Barack Obama have agreed to back a counterterrorism police unit in Yemen to tackle the rising terrorist threat from the country. (AP Photo/Mohammed al-Qadhi, File)
FILE - In this Dec. 24, 2009 file photo, U.S. David Goldman, top, followed by his 9-year-old son Sean, gestures as he boards a plane at the Galeao airport, in Rio de Janeiro, Brazil. The Society of Professional Journalists condemned NBC News for practicing "checkbook journalism" by chartering a jet that carried a New Jersey man involved in a bitter custody battle and his son home from Brazil. (AP Photo/Silvia Izquierdo, File)

Load-Date: January 7, 2010


End of Document