U.S. CREDIT OUTLOOK DROPS
Pittsburgh Post-Gazette
November 29, 2011 Tuesday
SOONER EDITION


Copyright 2011 P.G. Publishing Co.
Section: NATIONAL; NATIONAL BRIEFS; Pg. A-6
Length: 552 words
Byline: Compiled from news services
Body


WASHINGTON -- The U.S. lost its last stable outlook from the three biggest credit-ranking companies after Fitch Ratings lowered the nation to negative following a congressional committee's failure to agree on deficit cuts.
Fitch's outlook on the U.S., which it still assigns its top AAA grade, reflects "declining confidence that timely fiscal measures necessary to place U.S. public finances on a sustainable path will be forthcoming," making the probability of a downgrade greater than 50 percent over two years, the company said yesterday in a statement. Standard & Poor's and Moody's Investors Service said Nov. 21 that the so-called Supercommittee's inability to reach an agreement didn't merit downgrades because the inaction will trigger $1.2 trillion in automatic spending cuts.
U.S. government debt rallied the most since the end of 2008 after Standard & Poor's stripped the U.S. of its AAA ranking on Aug. 5, while global equities lost $9.7 trillion in market value during that period. Even with lawmakers reluctant to embrace the automatic cutbacks that helped prevent downgrades, President Barack Obama has pledged to veto any efforts to undermine the spending reductions.
Sentencing goes to court
WASHINGTON -- The Supreme Court on Monday agreed to resolve a question that has vexed the lower federal courts since Congress enacted the Fair Sentencing Act of 2010 to narrow the gap between sentences meted out for offenses involving two kinds of cocaine.
But what about people who committed their offenses before the statute came into force but were not sentenced until afterward?
For such defendants, Judge Terence T. Evans wrote in one of the pair of cases the Supreme Court agreed to hear, the law "might benefit from a slight name change: The Not Quite as Fair as it could be Sentencing Act of 2010 (NQFSA) would be a bit more descriptive."
Detainee policy concerns
WASHINGTON -- FBI Director Robert Mueller on Monday raised significant concerns about requiring military custody for captured suspected terrorists, arguing that the divisive provision in a sweeping defense bill could harm ongoing terrorism investigations.
The White House has threatened a veto over the language in the bill and limits on its ability to transfer suspected terrorists.
In a letter to lawmakers, Mr. Mueller said the legislation would add a substantial amount of uncertainty as to what steps should be followed in a terrorism investigation in the United States. Mueller also said the provision could restrict the FBI from using a grand jury to gather records or subpoenaing witnesses.
Competent for trial
WASHINGTON -- Accused White House shooter Oscar Ramiro Ortega was found competent to stand trial by the doctor who evaluated him, the U.S. said in a court filing that seeks a more extensive probe of the defendant's mental health.
U.S. prosecutors said in court papers filed today in Washington that while they didn't dispute the conclusion of Elisabeth Teegarden that he would be able to stand trial, they're seeking a full psychiatric evaluation as it's likely his mental health will be an issue in the case. Ms. Teegarden's report was based on 50 minutes of screening, prosecutors said.
Mr. Ortega was charged with trying to kill President Barack Obama by allegedly firing a semi-automatic rifle at the White House on Nov. 11.

Load-Date: November 30, 2011


End of Document