U.S. rips Syria over issues of terrorism, aiding Iraqis
The Columbian (Vancouver, WA.)
April 15, 2003, Tuesday


Copyright 2003 The Columbian Publishing Co.
Section: World/Nation; Pg. a4
Length: 301 words
Byline: BARRY SCHWEID, Associated Press writer
Body


WASHINGTON -- Triumphant in Iraq, the Bush administration looked across the border to Syria on Monday, accusing it of harboring remnants of Saddam Hussein's government and supporting terrorism. Secretary of State Colin Powell raised the possibility of diplomatic and economic sanctions.
Sharpening the Bush administration's rhetoric, Powell said, "They should review their actions and their behavior, not only with respect to who gets haven in Syria and weapons of mass destruction, but especially the support of terrorist activity."
National Security Adviser Condoleezza Rice, in a parallel thrust at Damascus, said Syria's support for terrorism and "harboring the remnants of the Iraqi regime" were unacceptable.
But she indicated the administration was not contemplating military action.
Using the same formula the administration has applied to North Korea and its aggressive nuclear weapons program, Rice said at the Washington Institute for Near East Policy, "The president has made clear every problem in the Middle East cannot be dealt with the same way."
And Powell signaled President Bashar Assad that the Bush administration still would like to include Syria in the Mideast peacemaking it intends to accelerate between Israel and the Palestinians.
"As we go down the road to peace, we want it to be a comprehensive peace, and ultimately, of course, that would have to include finding a way to settle the outstanding issues with Syria, as well," Powell said at a State Department news conference.
Syria seeks to recover the Golan Heights, a strategic area it lost to Israel in the 1967 Mideast War.
Syrian President Bashar Assad met with British and Saudi envoys Monday in Damascus as his government denied charges by U.S. officials that Syria has weapons of mass destruction and is sheltering Iraqi leaders.

Load-Date: April 15, 2003


End of Document