U.S. IS TARGET OF 'ISLAMIST' TERRORISM CAMPAIGN, BOOK CLAIMS
St. Louis Post-Dispatch (Missouri)
May 16, 1993, SUNDAY, THREE STAR Edition


Copyright 1993 St. Louis Post-Dispatch, Inc.
Section: NEWS; Pg. 8A
Length: 320 words
Dateline: WASHINGTON
Body


The suspect in the killings outside CIA headquarters in January was a long-term Iranian agent, ordered by Iran to carry out the attack, says a new book by the director of a special congressional panel on terrorism.  The book, "Target America, Terrorism in the U.S. Today," also asserts that the attack at the CIA's main gate was linked to the bombing of New York's World Trade Center a month later as part of an Iranian-engineered assault on the United States.  The author, Yosseff Bodansky, said the Trade Center bombing on Feb. 26, which killed six people and injured more than 1,000, marked the start in earnest of a Muslim holy war against the United States and the West.  "The bombing in New York and the few terrorist operations that preceded it (most of which had been interpreted as crimes) are but a prelude to an escalation in Islamist terrorism in the United States and Canada," Bodansky wrote.  He said the leaders of Iran, Syria, Sudan and their allies were backing the holy war in an effort to undo a post-Cold War world order in which the United States is the only superpower and Western democratic values dominate.  Five people were shot, two of them fatally, outside CIA headquarters in Langley, Va., on Jan. 25, by a gunman using an AK-47 assault rifle. The gunman fled.  On Feb. 9, authorities announced that they had begun a worldwide search for a Pakistani immigrant whom they identified as their prime suspect, Mir Aimal Kansi, 28.
At the time, federal investigators said they had no idea of potential motives.  In his book, Bodansky said the attack had been "the test run of the Islamists' 'Afghan' network," the CIA-backed, Pakistan-based Islamic guerrillas who helped defeat Soviet forces in Afghanistan in the 1980s.  "Mir Aimal Kansi was an Iranian long-term plant, an illegal agent infiltrated into the U.S. for operations in the Washington area and activated for the CIA killings," Bodansky wrote.

Load-Date: October 7, 1993


End of Document