U.S. officials detain exile wanted by Cuba in bombing of airliner Castro leads massive march past U.S. mission to demand the arrest
St. Louis Post-Dispatch (Missouri)
May 18, 2005 Wednesday
FIVE STAR EDITION


Copyright 2005 St. Louis Post-Dispatch, Inc.
Section: NEWS; Pg. A10
Length: 437 words
Byline: BY ANITA SNOW The Associated Press
Dateline: HAVANA 
Body


Fidel Castro led hundreds of thousands of Cubans past the U.S. mission Tuesday to demand that the United States arrest a Cuban exile sought in the bombing of an airliner, accusing Washington of hypocrisy in its war on terrorism. Hours later, U.S. officials confirmed the alleged militant was in custody.
The Department of Homeland Security said it detained Luis Posada Carriles on Tuesday after the longtime Castro opponent granted interviews to TV stations and The Miami Herald for the first time since surfacing in the United States two months ago. Posada, a former CIA operative and Venezuelan security official, is wanted in connection with the 1976 bombing of the Cuban airliner that killed 73 people.
A key associate of Castro's welcomed the news Tuesday that the U.S. picked up Posada but questioned why it took two months to arrest the man he called an escaped militant sought for two decades in a deadly airliner bombing.
"Do you want us to applaud the fact that he has been arrested after his presence (in the United States) was burning for two months?" Parliament speaker Ricardo Alarcon said in an interview.
"Now Mr. Bush has to prove he is sincere about terrorism," Alarcon said. "What the United States has to do now is clear: If there is a request for his extradition, it has to attend to it according to its own laws."
The Cuban leader's campaign for Posada's arrest has been the most intense media battle he has waged since the international custody struggle over young Cuban castaway Elian Gonzalez.
The size of the crowd in the "March Against Terrorism" was similar to those organized in 2000 to press for Elian's return to his father.
"This is not a march against the people of the United States," said the 78-year-old Castro, differentiating between Americans and their government. "It is a march against terrorism, in favor of life and of peace."
"Our country has been the object of the most ferocious war in history," Castro added in brief comments to the crowd, referring to U.S. economic sanctions against the island and early U.S. government plots to kill him.
Posada, 77, arrived in the United States in March and soon after requested political asylum. Venezuela, which has an extradition treaty with the United States, last week formally requested his extradition in the 1976 bombing. Posada has denied any role in the bombing.
The Homeland Security department did not say what it planned to do with Posada after detaining him. But it said that generally, the U.S. government does not return people to Cuba or to countries acting on Cuba's behalf. The department said it had 48 hours to decide his status.

Graphic

 
PHOTO
 PHOTO - Carriles    PHOTO BY THE ASSOCIATED PRESS - Cuban President Fidel Castro (center) leads a march past the U.S. mission in Havana, Cuba, on Tuesday to demand the arrest of a Cuban exile. Hours later, U.S. officials confirmed that the alleged militant was in custody. 

Load-Date: May 18, 2005


End of Document