U.S. Senate studies domestic terrorism
The Daily Record of Rochester (Rochester, NY)
September 24, 2012 Monday


Copyright 2012 Dolan Media Newswires All Rights Reserved
Section: NEWS
Length: 1257 words
Byline: Denise M. Champagne
Body


Recent mass shootings, including the Aug. 5 killing of six people at a Wisconsin Sikh temple, have U.S. senators looking at ways to combat the threat of domestic terrorism.
More than 400 people attended a hearing last week on “Hate Crimes and the Threat of Domestic Extremism,” by the Senate Committee on the Judiciary’s Subcommittee on the Constitution, Civil Rights and Human Rights.
The most poignant testimony came from Harpreet Singh Saini, a young man whose mother, Paramjit Kaur Saini, was killed while worshipping at the Sikh Gurdwara in Oak Creek, Wis.
“I am here because my mother was murdered in an act of hate 45 days ago,” Saini said. “This was not supposed to be our American story. This was not my mother’s dream. ”
Mrs. Saini and five men were gunned down by Wade Michael Page before he turned the gun on himself, becoming the seventh fatality.
Saini, who was accompanied by his brother and best friend, testified that his mother was a brilliant, smart woman who worked long hours to support her family and get her sons educated.
“But now she’s gone,” Saini said. “Because of a man who hated her because she wasn’t his color, his religion. I just had my first day of college and my mother was wasn’t there to send me off. She won’t be there on my graduation or my wedding day. She won’t be there to meet her grandchildren. ”
He also talked about the other victims and how their families have lost so much, but continue to live in the “high spirits and optimism” of their faith. Saini added that he wants to be part of the solution and that is why he wants to be a police officer like Lt. Brian Murphy, who was shot multiple times at the temple while trying to hold off Page. Murphy, who was released from the hospital Aug. 22, is credited with saving countless lives.
“Senators, I came here today to ask the government to give my mother the dignity of being a statistic,” Saini said. “The FBI does not track crimes against Sikhs. My mother and those shot that day will not even count on a federal form. We cannot solve a problem we refuse to recognize. ”
Roy L. Austin Jr., deputy assistant attorney general, Civil Rights Division, U.S. Department of Justice, acknowledged the Sikh religion is not singled out as targeted group, but that the Department of Justice has met regularly with Sikh members and that the division is bringing together “a broad array of religious groups” to determine which should be included.
Austin reviewed some of the hate crimes statutes passed by Congress since the late 1960s, noting the Oak Hill shootings are a reminder there is a lot of work yet to be done.
“I can tell you firsthand that the devastation caused by a single act of hate can reverberate through families, through communities and throughout the entire nation,” Austin said. “Whenever a hate crime is committed, a whole community sleeps a little less easily at night, haunted by the fear that they too might be attacked simply because of the color of their skin, the place where they were born, the faith that sustains them, or who they love. ”
In fiscal 2011, Austin said federal prosecutors convicted the most defendants on hate-crimes charges in more than a decade. He said cases involving hate-fueled violence directed at Muslim, Arab, Sikh and South Asian communities is on the rise.
“Sadly, the shooting in Oak Creek was not an isolated incident,” said Sen. Dick Durbin, D-Ill., who chairs the subcommittee. “More than 6,600 hate crimes were reported to the FBI in 2010, the most recent year for which statistics are available. In the week following the Oak Creek shooting, there were numerous attacks on mosques, including a mosque burned to the ground in Joplin, Mo.; a shooting at a mosque in my home state in Morton Grove, Ill. while 500 worshippers were praying inside; and an unidentified perpetrator throwing an improvised explosive at an Islamic school in Lombard, Ill., during prayer services. ”
He said at the same time, African-Americans, Jews, Latinos and lesbian, gay, bisexual and transgender Americans continue to be targeted and are victims of violent crimes every year.
Durbin, who noted the hearing was the first of its kind on domestic violence threats in many years, said he hopes it helps the Senate redouble it its efforts to combat the threat and take whatever steps are necessary to protect vulnerable communities.
He asked panelist Michael A. Clancy, deputy assistant director, FBI’s Counterterrorism Division, if there was a breakdown in intelligence because Page, a well-known white supremacist, was not investigated.
Clancy said his activities had not risen to the level that would warrant an investigation. He said it was known he was heavily involved in the white supremacist community, but had never been violent and there was no indication he posed a threat to any particular groups including Sikhs.
Violent extremism is a growing threat in the United States, according to Daryl Johnson, founder and owner of DT-Analytics LLC, a private consulting company in Washington, D.C. He said the threat comes from extremist belief systems that represent a broad range of religious, political and social causes and that the recent rise of violent anti-government attacks is related, in part, to the economic recession, divisive political and social issues, shifting demographics and some policy changes endorsed by the current administration.
Johnson also identified several challenges to combating domestic terrorism including confusion on the definition by different government agencies, no annual summary by the government, a shortage of analysts to monitor and assess domestic extremist activities (down to one from eight) and a lack of trained law enforcement officers since many who looked at domestic terrorism issues during the 1990s have retired.
While saying he deplores bias, discrimination and violent crimes motivated by bias, James B. Jacobs, Warren E. Burger professor of law at New York University School of Law, testified that he does not believe hate-crime laws are the solution and may actually create divisiveness.
He said determining what is a bias crime is frustrating for prosecutors and that it is often difficult to determine the motivations of offenders, if caught, and more difficult to prove.
As an example, he cited Dharun Ravi’s photographing his roommate, Tyler Clementi’s homosexual encounter and the controversy that arose after Clementi’s suicide about whether Ravi should be charged with a bias crime.
“While all Americans agree that invading a roommate’s privacy is wrong, there was great division over whether the punishment should be doubled if the roommate is gay,” Jacobs said. “The whole fight was so unnecessary since ‘simple’ invasion of privacy was punishable in New Jersey by a five-year maximum sentence. The politics of hate crime laws divide rather than unite us. ”
He also said most hate-crime prosecutions involve young defendants, frequently mixed-up teenagers, who commit low-level offenses such as criminal mischief and simple assault; and that murder is already punished as severely as possible.
“Hate-crime laws are counterproductive,” Jacobs said. “They politicize and spawn charges of hypocrisy and double standards. Those who are prosecuted call themselves victims of political correctness and martyrs to the First Amendment. Sending more people to prison for longer [terms] is hardly likely to contribute to a more tolerant society. ”
A webcast of the hearing, conducted Wednesday, is available on the Senate Judiciary Committee’s website at www.judiciary.senate.gov.

Load-Date: October 1, 2012


End of Document