U.S. STUDY DISCOUNTS SOVIET TERROR ROLE
The New York Times
March 29, 1981, Sunday, Late City Final Edition


Copyright 1981 The New York Times Company
Section: Section 1; Part 1; Page 4, Column 1; Foreign Desk
Length: 781 words
Byline: By JUDITH MILLER, Special to the New York Times
Dateline: WASHINGTON, March 28
Body


A draft report produced by the Central Intelligence Agency has concluded that there is insufficient evidence to substantiate Administration charges that the Soviet Union is directly helping to foment international terrorism, Congressional and Administration sources said today.
William J. Casey, Director of Central Intelligence, has asked his analysts, the sources said, to review their conclusions, given the substantial opposition to the report from other agencies.
The draft estimate, produced by the C.I.A.'s National Foreign Assessments Center, has stirred debate within Administration foreign policy circles, as foreign affairs spokesmen have publicly accused the Soviet Union of training, equipping, and financing international terrorist groups.
The review of the draft estimate has once again raised questions about the relationship between intelligence officials and policy makers, with some C.I.A. officials concerned that the agency is coming under pressure to tailor its analysis to fit the policy views of the Administration.
CIA report concludes that there is insufficient evidence to substantiate Administration charges that USSR is fomenting international terrorismCharges in Last Administration
Similar charges were made during the Carter Administration and resulted in frequently bitter exchanges between policy makers and intelligence officials.
Bruce C. Clark, who heads the agency's assessments, or analysis unit, is retiring from the C.I.A. in April, in what officials said was a personal decision unrelated to the dispute over the intelligence estimate on terrorism.
One official said that a successor had not been named, but another indicated that Mr. Clark's successor would be the current director of the agency's operations unit, John McMahon.
The special national intelligence estimate on terrorism was begun soon after the Administration took office, officials said. Secretary of State Alexander M. Haig Jr. said on Jan. 28 in his first news conference that the Soviet Union, as part of a ''conscious policy,'' undertook the ''training, funding and equipping'' of international terrorists.
The Administration has subsequently said that combatting international terrorism is one of its key foreign policy objectives.
 
'Ample Evidence' on Soviet Role
In addition, Richard V. Allen, President Reagan's national security adviser, said in an interview with ABC News this week that ''ample evidence'' had been accumulated to demonstrate the Soviet Union's involvement in international terrorism. Mr. Allen also said that the Soviet Union was ''probably'' supporting the Palestine Liberation Organization, which he said must be identified as a terrorist organization, through financial assistance and through support of its ''main aims.''
Finally, Mr. Allen concluded that Israeli air raids into southern Lebanon should be generally recognized as a ''hot pursuit of a sort and therefore, justified.''
Officials said that the draft estimate contained some factual evidence to support charges that the Soviet Union was directly aiding and abetting terrorist groups, but that in many instances the evidence of such involvement was either murky or nonexistent.
The estimate, which was circulated for comment to the State Department, National Security Council, Defense Intelligence Agency, and the National Security Agency, stirred angry debate and response.
 
Defining 'Terrorism' a Problem
Some officials described the dispute as ''definitional,'' that is, that agency officials found it difficult to agree on a common working definition of what constitutes a terrorist group.
Officials from the Defense Intelligence Agency criticized the document because, they said, the facts it contained did not support what one official termed the agency's ''weasel-worded'' conclusion that evidence was contradictory on the extent to which the Soviet Union could be regarded as a conscious principle agent of terrorism.
Soon after the draft document was circulated and began generating comment, Mr. Casey asked to review the report. After reading the estimate, he asked that the estimate be reviewed.
''That's really the way the process is supposed to work,'' said one knowledgeable official. ''The estimate is supposed to reflect the views of other agencies and it's not unusual that it would be restudied and rewritten after the agencies have commented.''
Other Administration and Congressional officials, however, voiced concern that the agency was once again being asked to tailor its views to fit the public pronouncements of senior Administration officials.
''There would not have been a review if the estimate's conclusions had totally supported the Administration's charges,'' the official said.


End of Document