U.S. urged to step up efforts against 'terrorism'
Deseret News (Salt Lake City)
June 5, 2000, Monday


Copyright 2000 The Deseret News Publishing Co.
Section: WIRE;
Length: 349 words
Body


WASHINGTON (Reuters) - A congressional panel has recommended the United States change the way it tackles "terrorism" including monitoring all foreign students within U.S. borders, The Washington Post reported Sunday.
The National Commission on Terrorism, set up by Congress two years ago in response to bombings of U.S. embassies in East Africa, also suggested relaxing restrictions on the Central Intelligence Agency and threatening sanctions against friendly states such as Greece and Pakistan.
The report, to be released Monday, calls for more anti-terrorism spending, tighter controls on possible fund-raising for what the United States considers terrorism and putting pressure on foreign countries for cooperation.
The commission suggested that the U.S. military--not the Federal Bureau of Investigation or the Federal Emergency Management Agency--should lead U.S. response efforts to terrorist attack at home due to its ability to put its vast resources into play quickly and efficiently.
The newspaper quoted Paul Bremer, a former State Department ambassador-at-large for counterterrorism and commission chairman as saying, "The threat is changing, and it's becoming more deadly."
The report criticized the CIA's policy of having senior officials approve the recruitment of informants' who may have committed serious crimes such as human rights violations.
"The CIA has created a climate that is overly risk averse," the commission wrote, adding regulations forced the CIA to rely too much on the help of foreign intelligence services.
The paper quoted a CIA official denying those claims, saying agency rules have never stopped it from recruiting a valuable informant.
The report also suggested the FBI simplify its overly complex rules for opening a preliminary investigation of people considered potential "terrorists".
It also suggested U.S. allies Greece and Pakistan should be designated as "not fully cooperating" against terrorism--a move which would bar those countries from buying U.S. military equipment. Afghanistan, the report said, should be upgraded to a "state sponsor" of terrorism.

Load-Date: June 5, 2000


End of Document