U.S. should back Afghan plea for Pakistani joint border effort; If the two nations could join forces against terrorism, that would be a major advance.
Portland Press Herald (Maine)
September 26, 2008 Friday
FINAL Edition


Copyright 2008 Blethen Maine Newspapers, Inc. All Rights Reserved
Section: EDITORIAL; Pg. A12; OUR VIEWS
Length: 288 words
Byline: --
Body


A leadership change in one of two adjacent and troubled U.S. allies in Southwest Asia could produce real cooperation against terrorism on both sides of their often-violent border.
At least, that's the view of the leader of the other nation, and perhaps there's a chance he's right.
Pakistan and Afghanistan share not only a corner of a continent but a long history of turmoil.
But Afghan President Hamid Karzai, in visiting New York with other world leaders for a round of diplomatic visits, said a suggestion his government's defense minister made for joint cross-border military operations was a sincere and constructive attempt to deal with entrenched terrorist groups.
Karzai called for U.S. backing for the effort and said it offered ''for the first time'' a hope of winning the war against extremist forces.
The defense minister, Gen. Abdul Rahim Wardak, said that the election of a new civilian president, Asif Ali Zadari, in Pakistan could offer the opportunity to create ''an enhanced mechanism for practical cross-border cooperation, including strengthening routine links between our military, border security and law enforcement institutions. We must move beyond diplomacy and confidence-building exchanges to the delivery of practical results.''
The proposal, which was sent to Islamabad several weeks ago, is ''under study'' there. With 4,500 more U.S. troops set to be in Afghanistan by January, and with Thursday's reports of Pakistani and U.S. troops exchanging ''warning shots'' near the border, any chance of boosting cooperation is worthwhile.
They think it's a good idea on the Afghan side of the border. The problem is to get Zadari to agree, and that's where U.S. efforts to lessen tensions can play a vital role.

Load-Date: September 26, 2008


End of Document