U.S. Defends Prosecuting Benghazi Suspect in Civilian Rather Than Military Court
The New York Times
June 18, 2014 Wednesday
Late Edition - Final


Copyright 2014 The New York Times Company
Section: Section A; Column 0; Foreign Desk; Pg. 10
Length: 811 words
Byline: By JENNIFER STEINHAUER and CHARLIE SAVAGE; Peter Baker contributed reporting.
Body


WASHINGTON -- Conservative lawmakers on Tuesday sharply criticized the Obama administration's decision to prosecute the suspected leader of the 2012 attack in Benghazi, Libya, in the civilian criminal justice system, arguing that he should be questioned and tried by the military.
''The last thing we want is for this terrorist suspect to hear the statement, 'You have the right to remain silent,' '' Senator Lindsey Graham, Republican of South Carolina, said in a statement. Mr. Graham said the suspect, Ahmed Abu Khattala, should be sent to the military prison at Guantánamo Bay, Cuba.
The attack on the American Mission in Benghazi -- in which four Americans were killed, including the United States ambassador, J. Christopher Stevens -- has been a contentious issue among Republicans. They have questioned the Obama administration's handling of the attack and accused it of a cover-up.
Mr. Abu Khattala's capture did not temper the Republican criticisms. And it revived the debate over whether Islamic militants should be handled under the military or civilian justice systems.
''A non-U.S. citizen who committed a crime outside of the United States in what can only be defined as an act of terror tantamount more to a war than a criminal-code violation puts me in the camp of arguing for a noncivilian court trial,'' said Representative Trey Gowdy, Republican of South Carolina. Mr. Gowdy, a former prosecutor, is leading a special House committee investigating the attack.
The White House quickly pushed back.
''Some have suggested that he should go to Gitmo,'' said Caitlin Hayden, a White House spokeswoman. ''Let me rule that out from the start.''
''We have had substantial success delivering swift justice to terrorists through our federal court system,'' she added.
Greg Doherty, the brother of one of the attack's victims, Glen A. Doherty, said he supported the decision to try Mr. Abu Khattala in a civilian court. ''I think that's what we should do with criminals, which is try them,'' he said.
Republicans have been wary of the Obama administration's handling of such cases since 2009, after the failed bombing of a Detroit-bound airliner. Officials charged the suspect criminally, read him his rights and provided him with a lawyer. Republicans said he was a combatant in a terrorism war against the United States.
There are two strands of criticism. One is whether the initial interrogation of a detainee would be better conducted by the F.B.I. or the military, and the other is whether any trial would be better handled in federal court or before a military commission.
Both questions are complicated in Mr. Abu Khattala's case and others like it because it is not clear whether the law of war applies to him. The United States is engaged in an armed conflict against Al Qaeda, the Taliban and their associated forces, but not against all Islamist militants anywhere in the world.
It is a matter of dispute whether Mr. Abu Khattala's militia, Ansar al-Shariah of Benghazi, has any meaningful operational ties to Al Qaeda. While the militia shares a similar ideology with Al Qaeda, the United States government does not consider the two groups to be affiliated. That could make a conviction before a tribunal vulnerable to being overturned on appeal.
The Obama administration has sought to close the Guantánamo prison and refused to send newly captured prisoners there, instead using federal courts to prosecute terrorism cases that arose after Mr. Obama took office.
It was not clear whether Mr. Abu Khattala, who was captured over the weekend, had been warned of his Miranda rights to remain silent and obtain a lawyer. The Obama administration has adopted a policy of interrogating terrorism suspects for long periods without such a warning under a ''public safety'' exception.
''We will always seek to elicit all the actionable intelligence and information we can from terrorist suspects taken into our custody,'' Ms. Hayden said.
The military commissions system, which the Bush administration established and Congress revised in 2009, has struggled. Appeals courts have vacated the convictions of the only two Guantánamo detainees who were tried for war crimes before a military commission -- as opposed to pleading guilty without a trial and giving up a right to appeal -- because of flaws that would likely not have been a problem in civilian court.
Two years after the arraignment of Khalid Shaikh Mohammed and four other detainees accused of aiding the Sept. 11, 2001, attacks, the case is snarled in tangential issues, and no trial is in sight.
The debate, as all things on Capitol Hill, appeared to break along partisan lines.
''I fully support the administration's efforts to gather intelligence from Abu Khattala and prosecute him in federal court,'' said Senator Dianne Feinstein, Democrat of California and chairwoman of the Senate Intelligence Committee.

http://www.nytimes.com/2014/06/18/world/middleeast/us-defends-prosecuting-benghazi-suspect-in-civilian-rather-than-military-court.html

Load-Date: June 18, 2014


End of Document