U.S. Working To Bring Mumbai Attackers To Justice: FBI Chief
RTT News (United States)
March 3, 2009 Tuesday


Copyright 2009 NoticiasFinancieras/Grupo de Diarios America All Rights Reserved
Length: 319 words
Body


(RTTNews) - The United States Tuesday said that it will work with India and the international community to bring the perpetrators of last year&apos;s Mumbai attacks to justice and condemned the terrorist attack on Sri Lankan cricketers in the Pakistani city Lahore saying terrorism is not a local, but a global issue, media reports say.
"Needless to say, the topic of our discussions was terrorism around the world, most particularly the Mumbai attack, in which 170 persons were killed, including six Americans," Federal Bureau of Investigation (FBI) chief Robert Mueller told reporters after his meeting with Indian Home Minister P. Chidambaram to discuss security and counter-terrorism measures with U.S. assistance.
"We have seen unprecedented cooperation between our various agencies both during the Mumbai attacks and after and we--each of us--are intent on assuring that those responsible are brought to justice," he said.
Condemning the Mumbai attacks, the FBI chief underlined that such an incident showed the need for greater cooperation to fight this global issue.
He said that terrorism is not just a local issue nor is it confined to one country alone and to be successful we all have to work together, share intelligence and utilize our various judicial systems to bring to justice those responsible for these attacks.
We will continue to work with our counterparts here as well as our counterparts around the world to make sure that we not only bring these persons to justice, but also that we prevent further attacks," the FBI chief stressed.
The FBI chief also met India&apos;s National Security Advisor and Intelligence Bureau chief and discussed with them greater sharing of intelligence and information between the agencies of the two countries to prevent terror attacks in the future.
For comments and feedback: contact editorial@rttnews.com
Copyright(c) 2009 RealTimeTraders.com, Inc. All Rights Reserved

Load-Date: April 16, 2010


End of Document