U.S. cardinal bars controversial priest
Richmond Times Dispatch (Virginia)
June 30, 2013 Sunday
State Edition


Copyright 2013 Richmond Newspapers, Inc. All Rights Reserved
Section: NEWS; Pg. A-24
Length: 511 words
Body


U.S. cardinal bars controversial priest
BOSTON - Cardinal Sean O'Malley banned an Austrian priest from speaking at a parish because the priest advocates ordaining women and making celibacy for priests optional.
The Rev. Helmut Schuller was scheduled to speak at Saint Susanna Parish in Dedham on July 17 as part of 15-city U.S. tour. His talk has been moved to a nearby Unitarian Universalist church, The Boston Globe reported.
Terry Donilon, a spokesman for the archdiocese, said in a statement that the archdiocese's policy is "not to permit individuals to conduct speaking engagements in Catholic parishes or at church events when those individuals promote positions that are contrary to Catholic teachings."
Schuller is founder of the Austrian Priests' Initiative, which advocates allowing women and married people to become priests as a way to address a global priest shortage.
National Cathedral celebrates ruling
WASHINGTON - The National Cathedral rang its church bells, along with some other Washington churches, to celebrate the Supreme Court's decisions on gay marriage.
Cathedral spokesman Richard Weinberg said the bells rang at noon Wednesday. Bells were also set to ring at other Episcopal, Methodist, Presbyterian, Unitarian and other Christian churches.
In a statement, the cathedral's dean, the Rev. Gary Hall, says the church is ringing its bells "to celebrate the extension of federal marriage equality to all the same-sex couples modeling God's love in lifelong covenants."
Groups sue N.J. over grants to schools
NEWARK, N.J. - New Jersey's plans to award more than $11 million to an all-male Jewish school and Princeton Theological Seminary violates state law and should be stopped, civil liberties groups said in a complaint filed in state court.
The ACLU and its New Jersey chapter, along with Americans United for Separation of Church and State, filed the lawsuit in Trenton. They claim the grants violate the state constitution's prohibitions against using taxpayer money for places of worship and giving preference to a religion, as well as violate its stipulation that public money be used for public purposes. In addition, the suit says, the grant awarded to the Beth Medrash Govoha, an all-male Talmudic studies center in Lakewood, violates state law against discrimination based on gender.
A spokesman for Gov. Chris Christie did not return requests for comment.
FBI pulls bus ads over stereotype charges
SEATTLE - The FBI says it's pulling some advertisements off buses in the Seattle area, after some people complained that they stereotyped Muslims.
The ads, which began running this month in connection with a State Department program, features pictures of 16 men wanted around the globe for terrorist activities below the words: "Faces of Global Terrorism."
Among those criticizing the ads was U.S. Rep. Jim McDermott of Seattle, who suggested they gave the impression that "terrorism only comes from one religion or one color of people," and said the ads might increase the risk of hate crimes against Middle Eastern, South Asian and Muslim Americans.

Notes

Religion Briefs Copyright © 2013, The Richmond Times-Dispatch and may not be republished without permission. E-mail library@timesdispatch.com

Load-Date: July 2, 2013


End of Document