U.S. SEEKS TO AVOID IRAN ENERGY DEAL BLOWUP;
MIGHT NOT IMPOSE SANCTIONS IF REGIMES PRESS TEHRAN TO STOP PROMOTING TERRORISM
Pittsburgh Post-Gazette (Pennsylvania)
October 1, 1997, Wednesday,
SOONER EDITION


Copyright 1997 P.G. Publishing Co.
Section: WORLD,
Length: 480 words
Byline: CAROL GIACOMO, REUTERS NEWS SERVICE
Dateline: WASHINGTON
Body


The United States, keen to avoid another trans-Atlantic trade war, yesterday raised the possibility of waiving Iran-related sanctions on foreign firms if their governments pressure Tehran to end terrorism.
The objective of the U.S. Iran-Libya sanctions law was not to impose sanctions but ''to get other countries in the region, in Europe, in particular, to work with us on the subject of tightening up the pressure on Iran,'' State Department spokesman James Rubin said.
He said the administration would try to repeat with Iran what it considered a successful U.S. campaign to use an American sanctions law against Cuba to get Europeans to halt investment there and press Havana on human rights.
''We're going to be talking with our allies about ways to ratchet up the pressure,'' Rubin told reporters.
''That is a factor that will go into (U.S.) decision-making, because the (Iran sanctions) law itself specifies the option of waiving a sanction in the event the governments themselves have agreed to tighten the pressure,'' he said.
U.S., European and Canadian experts would meet next Wednesday and Oct. 28 as part of the Iran dialogue. Undersecretary of State Stuart Eizenstat, who handles the Cuba negotiations, would be a key figure in the U.S. effort on Iran.
France's energy giant Total SA announced Sunday it and consortium partners in Russia and Malaysia sealed the biggest foreign investment in Iran since the 1979 revolution, defying U.S. threats that the $ 2 billion contract would trigger punitive action.
Despite tough initial reaction to the deal, officials said Washington hoped there would be a way to avert a new trade dispute with its friends and allies over trade with Iran.
Still smarting from the bruising fight that won reluctant European acceptance of the merger of aircraft manufacturers Boeing-McDonnell Douglas, ''we don't need another'' strain in relations, one White House official said.
Officials acknowledged that avoiding a dispute with Europe over Iran, where billions of dollars are at stake, would be much harder than resolving similar tensions over Cuba.
And while the administration may consider its handling of the Cuba sanctions law, known as Helms-Burton after its sponsors, trans-Atlantic tensions still fester in that case and core issues remain unresolved. All sides are trying to reach agreement by Oct. 15.
Under the Iran-Libya Sanctions Act passed in 1996, President Clinton is required to impose sanctions on any foreign company investing more than $ 20 million a year in the two countries' energy industries.
Total contends the deal was in accordance with French law and U.N. regulations and noted that the European Union was contesting the extra-territorial application of the U.S. law.
France has sided with Total and in Brussels, the European Commission signaled its intent to fight Washington in the world trade arena if it imposes sanctions.

Load-Date: October 8, 1997


End of Document