U.S. SAYS PAKISTAN BACKED INDIA JET HIJACKERS;
JUDGMENT COULD LEAD TO DESIGNATION AS STATE THAT BACKS TERRORISM
Pittsburgh Post-Gazette (Pennsylvania)
January 25, 2000, Tuesday,
SOONER EDITION


Copyright 2000 P.G. Publishing Co.
Section: WORLD,
Length: 710 words
Byline: JANE PERLEZ, THE NEW YORK TIMES
Dateline: WASHINGTON -
Body


The United States now believes that a terrorist group supported by the Pakistani military was responsible for the hijacking of an Indian Airlines jet last month, a judgment that puts Pakistan at risk of being placed on Washington's list of nations that support terrorism, Clinton administration officials said.
The new military leader of Pakistan, Gen. Pervez Musharraf, was asked in a meeting with three administration officials in Islamabad last week to ban the group, Harkat ul-Mujahedeen, but the request was rebuffed, senior officials here said.
Musharraf was also asked to exert pressure on the Taliban government in Afghanistan, with which Pakistan has friendly relations, to expel Osama bin Ladin, who was implicated in the bombings of two U.S. embassies in Africa, but no progress was made with this request either, the officials said.
The conclusion that a terrorist group supported by Pakistan carried out the hijacking comes as the White House must decide in coming weeks whether President Clinton should visit Pakistan as part of his planned trip to India and Bangladesh at the end of March.
The visit to India is expected to be announced this week, with the option of a stopover in Pakistan still open, pending some gestures of cooperation by Pakistan, officials said. Rejecting a presidential visit to Pakistan during a trip that includes a visit to India would be one of the severest snubs the White House could make, especially during the first presidential trip to the region in 21 years.
Information that Harkat ul-Mujahedeen was responsible for the hijacking came in the aftermath of the seizure of the jet, when it became clearer who made arrangements for the escape of the hijackers, administration officials said.
Harkat ul-Mujahedeen is the new name for Harkat ul-Ansar, a radical Kashmiri nationalist group that was put on the State Department's list of terrorist groups in 1997, officials said. The group changed its name after being added to the list.
Administration officials declined to give details of precisely what they knew about the group's role in the hijacking that ended with 155 hostages being freed in exchange for the release from prison of three members of Harkat ul-Mujahedeen by the Indian government.
Karl Inderfurth, the assistant secretary of state for South Asian affairs, one of the three officials who met with Musharraf, told the general that the United States was concerned about the links between Harkat ul-Mujahedeen and his military and intelligence services, officials said.
The general was told that the United States believed that Harkat ul-Mujahedeen "was responsible for the hijacking and that the United States believed the group operated openly and clandestinely" with the support of the military and intelligence services in Pakistan, a senior official said.
In response, Musharraf said he would consider the administration's request to shut down the group, but he left the impression that no action would be taken soon, the official said.
The question of Pakistan's role in the hijacking has already inflamed relations between India and Pakistan, which both possess nuclear bombs.
Shortly after the hijacking, India accused Pakistan of masterminding the plot and said it had evidence to back up its claims. But the Indian government has not yet produced the evidence.
Relations between the two countries have plummeted to their lowest point in decades. Overlaying the heightened tensions are the activities of the terrorist groups in Pakistan.
After the hijacking, the Indian government urged the Clinton administration to put Pakistan on the State Department's list of countries that sponsor terrorism. Among the nations currently on the list are Iran, Iraq and Syria.
Such a designation would effectively end all loans to Pakistan from the World Bank and the International Monetary Fund, which some in the administration have argued would push already impoverished Pakistan into near collapse.
Even though Pakistan is believed by the Clinton administration to be harboring and supporting terrorist groups, there was substantial resistance from the Pentagon and the CIA to putting Pakistan on the list, in part because of help that Pakistan gave the United States during the Soviet Union's occupation of Afghanistan.

Load-Date: January 26, 2000


End of Document