U.S.-PAKISTAN RELATIONS WARMING, CELESTE SAYS;
Former governor gives first speech in series on terrorism
Dayton Daily News (Ohio)
November 6, 2001 Tuesday CITY EDITION


Copyright 2001 Dayton Newspapers, Inc.
Section: LOCAL; Pg. 3B
Length: 535 words
Byline: Laura A. Bischoff Columbus Bureau
Body


COLUMBUS - The Sept. 11 terrorist attacks changed America's relationship with Pakistan for the better, after years of decline, said Richard Celeste, former U.S. ambassador to India.
The U.S.-Pakistan relationship had cooled in the post Cold War period and after the Soviets pulled out of Afghanistan, the former Ohio governor said Monday at Ohio State University. At the same time, he said, U.S.-India relations were warming as America saw India as an emerging global power.
But Sept. 11 brought a call from President Bush for countries to decide if they were with America or with terrorists. Pakistan, which had been one of only three countries in the world with ties to the Taliban, sided with America.
"So, we face today, a very different equation in south Asia. Not one which is trouble free by any stretch of the imagination because of the differences between India and Pakistan, but one in which both India and Pakistan are supporting our effort," Celeste said.
Although the Ohio native son is known for serving as governor from 1982 to 1990, he has substantial international experience. The Rhodes Scholar served as ambassador to India from November 1997 to March 2001. He also served as an aide to an American ambassador to India in the 1960s and was director of the Peace Corps for two years.
His speech, South Asia: Uneasy Allies in the Struggle Against Terrorism, was the first in a series on terrorism sponsored by the OSU John Glenn Institute for Public Service and Public Policy. Former U.S. Sen. Glenn introduced Celeste to the standing-room-only crowd at the Faculty Club.
Celeste said terrorists represent a tiny fraction of the population living in Afghanistan, and most are foreigners who retreated there.
"This hatred, I think, is based on a deeply felt animosity that is in part religious or cultural; it is in part, I think, economic. Some of it has to do with political frustration in their own countries and the desire to see political change in their own countries, and they see that somehow the United States is an impediment to that change," he said.
It would be a mistake to put large numbers of troops on the ground for an extended period of time, Celeste said. Instead, he said, America should use its technical superiority and adaptability.
Glenn added that "surgical" military operations are more appropriate than taking control of Afghanistan with masses of troops.
Glenn also noted that 'terrorism, these days, flows like the wind across borders. We know of 50-some countries now that have (terrorist) cells.'
The world must organize against terrorism or it will be pushed out one place and crop up elsewhere, Glenn said. "One other thought on it - if we let 100,000 kids starve along that Afghan-Pakistan border this winter, we'll just have created a poster situation for recruits for (Osama) bin Laden," Glenn said.
Celeste said, "The vast majority of people in south Asia and the rest of the world really do admire our country and aspire to what our country has to offer. We should not lose sight of that fact. We could nurture that fact when we seek to mobilize all of these nations against terrorism."
Contact Laura Bischoff at (614) 224-1624 or e-mail her at laura_bischoff@coxohio.com  

Graphic

 
PHOTO, Richard Celeste

Load-Date: November 7, 2001


End of Document