U.S. diplomat in Sudan is slain Sudanese call shooting a criminal act, not terrorism; U.S. officials aren't sure.
St. Louis Post-Dispatch (Missouri)
January 2, 2008 Wednesday
THIRD EDITION


Copyright 2008 St. Louis Post-Dispatch, Inc. All Rights Reserved
Section: NEWS; Pg. A6
Length: 409 words
Byline: By Mohamed Osman THE ASSOCIATED PRESS
Dateline: KHARTOUM, Sudan 
Body


An American diplomat was shot and killed early Tuesday by gunmen in a passing car who cut off the car in which he was being driven home in Sudan's capital. Sudanese officials insisted it was not a terrorist attack, but the U.S. Embassy said it was too soon to determine the motive.
The diplomat's Sudanese driver also was killed in the shooting.
The Sudanese government often drums up anti-Western sentiment in the media. But attacks on foreigners are rare in Khartoum, where an American diplomat was last killed in 1973.
The diplomat's family identified him as John Granville, 33, originally of Buffalo, N.Y. He was an official for the U.S. Agency for International Development, or USAID, working to implement a 2005 peace agreement between Sudan's north and south that ended more than two decades of civil war, the family said.
He was being driven home about 4 a.m. when another vehicle cut off his car and opened fire before fleeing the scene, the Sudanese Interior Ministry said.
The diplomat's driver, 40-year-old Abdel-Rahman Abbas, was killed. Granville initially survived the attack with five gunshot wounds to the hand, shoulder and stomach. He died after surgery, said Walter Braunohler, the public affairs officer at the U.S. Embassy in Khartoum.
The USAID website, in information posted before his death, said Granville was working in southern Sudan on a program to distribute radios and had worked on other aid projects in the south.
In Buffalo, the diplomat's uncle, Daniel Granville, said the family was too shaken to comment.
Sudan's Foreign Ministry said the incident was "isolated and has no political or ideological connotations" and pledged to bring the culprits to justice, according to state news agency SUNA.
The Sudan Media Center, which has close links to the government, cited an unidentified government official as saying the attack was criminally motivated and that there was "no grain of suspicion of an organized terrorist action."
But Braunohler, the embassy spokesman, said it was "too early to tell" whether the attack was terror-related. Because of an ongoing investigation, he said he could not comment on any of the details provided by the Sudanese.
The shooting occurred a day after a joint U.N.-African peacekeeping force took over control in the western Sudanese region of Darfur, where more than 200,000 have died in a conflict that began in 2003. Al-Qaida has called for a "jihad" or holy war, in Sudan against the peacekeepers.

Notes

 ATTACK IN KHARTOUM 

Load-Date: January 2, 2008


End of Document