U.S.-PLO dialogue suspended
St. Petersburg Times (Florida)
June 21, 1990, Thursday, North Suncoast Edition


Times Publishing Company
Section: NATIONAL; Pg. 1A
Length: 401 words
Dateline: HUNTSVILLE, Ala.   &
Body


President Bush suspended U.S. talks with the Palestine Liberation Organization on Wednesday because of the PLO's failure to condemn an attempted Palestinian terrorist attack on Israel.
 
    "We've given the PLO ample time to deal with this issue. To date, the PLO has not provided a credible accounting," Bush said at a news conference.
Compiled from Wire Reports; Los Angeles Times; New York Times; Washington Post; Cox News Servicec   The talks began in December 1988 after PLO Chairman Yasser Arafat acknowledged Israel's right to exist and denounced the use of terrorism. Until he took those steps, U.S. policy barred contact with the PLO.
 
    But since the Israeli navy intercepted a guerrilla force approaching Tel Aviv from the Mediterranean Sea on May 30, Bush has been under pressure from Congress and Israel to suspend the talks. Four guerrillas were killed in the clash and 12 were captured.  There were no Israeli casualties.
 
  "I have decided to suspend the dialogue between
 the United States and the PLO, pending a satisfactory response from the PLO of steps it is taking to resolve problems associated with the recent acts of terrorism," Bush said.
 
    White House officials said Bush was prepared to resume talks with the PLO once the organization denounces the raid which a PLO faction known as the Palestine Liberation Front claimed to have carried out and disciplines the splinter group.
 
    A PLO spokesman in Tunis criticized the break as "an unfriendly and provocative act" and called for economic sanctions against the United States.
 
    The Israeli government, which had pushed strongly for an end to the U.S. dialogue with the PLO, welcomed the move and said it would be sending the administration new proposals to advance the peace process without the PLO.
 
    The PLO leadership has disavowed any involvement in the May 30 attack but PLO officials told the United States publicly condemning it would be politically unpopular with Palestinians.
 
    Although the talks have been confined to infrequent discussions between the American ambassador to Tunisia, Robert Pelletreau, and junior PLO officials at the organization's headquarters in Tunis, administration officials say they think the talks are essential for bridging the gap between the Palestinians and Israel.
 Information from the Los Angeles Times, New York Times, Washington Post and Cox News Service was used in this report.

Load-Date: November 13, 1992


End of Document