U.S. returned 5 terrorism suspects to Saudis in secret deal, officials say
St. Louis Post-Dispatch (Missouri)
July 4, 2004 Sunday Five Star Lift Edition


Copyright 2004 St. Louis Post-Dispatch, Inc.
Section: NEWS; Pg. A10
Length: 335 words
Byline: NEW YORK TIMES
Dateline: LONDON
Body


U.S. officials agreed to return five terrorism suspects to Saudi Arabia from Guantanamo Bay, Cuba, last year as part of a secret three-way deal intended to satisfy important allies in the invasion of Iraq, according to senior U.S. and British officials.
Under the arrangement, Saudi officials later released five Britons and two others who had been convicted of terrorist attacks in Saudi Arabia, the officials said. British diplomats said they believed that the men had been tortured by Saudi security police officers into confessing falsely.
Officials involved in the deliberations said the transfer of the Saudis from Guantanamo initially met with objections from officials at the Pentagon, the CIA and the Justice Department.
The Saudi prisoners were transferred to Riyadh, the capital, in May 2003. The five Britons and two others were freed three months later, in August.
The releases were public relations coups for the Saudi and British governments.
At the time, there was no indication the releases were related. But a U.S. official with knowledge of the negotiations said, "There is a link."
On Friday, a spokesman for the National Security Council denied that the Saudi detainees were transferred in exchange for the British prisoners. "There is no recollection here of any linkage between these two actions," the spokesman, Sean McCormick, said.
Current and former U.S., British and Saudi officials would speak about the arrangement only on the condition of anonymity.
Also on Friday, lawyers sued demanding that the U.S. government justify its detention of nine foreign terrorism suspects at Guantanamo Bay.
The challenges, filed in the U.S. District Court in Washington, are the first since the Supreme Court's ruling last week that the prisoners may use American courts to contest their detentions.
Challenges were filed on behalf of two British citizens, three French citizens, a German Turk, a Jordanian Palestinian refugee, an Iraqi refugee and a Canadian.
The Associated Press contributed to this report.

Load-Date: July 4, 2004


End of Document