U.S. VOICES CAUTION ON LINKING SYRIANS TO TERRORIST ACTS
The New York Times
May 15, 1986, Thursday, Late City Final Edition


Copyright 1986 The New York Times Company
Section: Section A; Page 1, Column 4; Foreign Desk
Length: 969 words
Byline: By BERNARD WEINRAUB, Special to the New York Times
Dateline: WASHINGTON, May 14
Body


The Reagan Administration said today that it was ''premature'' to draw any conclusions about Syrian complicity in recent terrorist activities.
But officials denied that the United States was seeking to ''soft-pedal'' Syria's links to violent attacks in Europe.
At the same time, Secretary of State George P. Shultz said that a Syrian buildup near Israel had helped create ''a highly tense situation'' in the Middle East, and that the United States had ''cautioned'' both nations about the possibility of war.
 
Military Movements Reported
In Lebanon, radio and television reports said Israel had sent as many as 50 tanks into an area of southern Lebanon under its control, The move, not confirmed by Israel, was said to have been in response to what was described as a redeployment of Syrian forces in Lebanon's eastern Bekaa region. [Page A3.] ''There are growing tensions, there is a big Syrian buildup,'' Mr. Shultz told reporters. ''They have been moving their fortifactions forward in Lebanon, and there are investigations going on about various terrorist incidents in which Syria may or may not have been involved. That remains to be seen. So it has contributed to tension.''
Mr. Shultz's comments on terrorism were echoed by Larry Speakes, the White House spokesman, who said that the United States did not have any ''conclusive'' evidence of Syrian involvement in recent terrorist acts.
 
Hostage Effort Welcomed
The Administration's cautious response to the possibility of Syrian involvement in terrorist actions came as Mr. Shultz and Mr. Speakes welcomed reported efforts by the Syrian Government to gain the release of five American and nine French hostages missing in Lebanon. American officials denied that the Administration was seeking to ''take it easy on the Syrians'' because of the possibility that they could play a role in the release of American hostages seized in Lebanon.
''We're not trying to soft-pedal Syrian involvement in terrorism,'' said a State Department official. ''They know how we feel about terrorism.'' The official emphasized, however, that British and West German authorities had not yet firmly concluded that Syria was behind a terrorist bombing in West Berlin and the attempt to place a bomb aboard an Israeli airliner at Heathrow Airport in London. ''It's still under investigation,'' said the official.
The cautious remarks about Syria were in marked contrast to Administration condemnation of Libya for its support of terrorism. Moreover, American officials conceded that the Administation's failure to link Syria to the recent terrorist attacks raised the possibility of upsetting European allies that have tied Syria to the recent incidents. The Administration has criticized European allies in recent months for failing to take tougher measures against terrorism.
At the White House and State Department, officials made it plain that the United States was pleased at possible Syrian efforts to free American and French hostages in Lebanon.
''The Syrian Government does remain engaged in the efforts to obtain the release of the hostages and they continue to make an effort in this respect,'' said Mr. Speakes. ''The Syrian Government obviously has an influence in this matter given its position in Lebanon and in the Bekaa.''
Mr. Speakes said that the Syrians ''have in the past and continue to be helpful in helping obtain the release of the hostages.''
 
'A Constructive Role'
Mr. Shultz, speaking to reporters, said the United States would ''welcome any efforts'' to free the hostages. ''Syria has played a constructive role in the past in some instances,'' he added. ''So if they can be helpful, that would be most welcome.''
CBS News reported Tuesday night that President Hafez al-Assad of Syria was engaged in an intensive effort to free the American and French hostages in Lebanon to improve his poor image in the West following reports linking him to terrorism. It was this report that led to questions today about possible Syrian efforts to release the prisoners, as well as Syrian involvement in terrorism.
In recent days, British and West German investigators have said that they had information linking Syria to the bombing in March of a West Berlin German-Arab friendship society. The Syrian secret services were also said to have been involved in an attempt April 17 to smuggle a bomb aboard an El Al jumbo jet at Heathrow Airport, according to Israeli and European authorities.
But Mr. Speakes said today, ''The British and West German Governments are investigating these cases and we are in contact with them. It would be premature to draw any conclusions until these investigations are concluded.''
 
No 'Conclusive Proof'
The White House spokesman acknowledged that British and West German authorities had tied Syria to recent terrorism. ''We are relying on these statements as correct, but once again, we do not have any independent or conclusive proof.''
On Tuesday, however, Deputy Secretary of State John C. Whitehead acknowledged that the United States ''has no reason to doubt'' Israeli accusations that Syria was behind the recent El Al incident.
Mr. Shultz, responding to a question, said ''we will do something about it'' if unequivocal evidence is produced linking Syria to recent terrorist acts.
He said the United States had declared ''a clear opposition'' to ''state-sponsored terrorism,'' and added that if such a case were identified ''we will do something about it.''
''It is not the right thing for us to say what we will do tactically,'' he said.
American officials have accused Col. Muammar el-Qaddafi, the Libyan leader, of masterminding the April bombing of a West Berlin discotheque, in which an American soldier and a Turkish woman were killed. They cited the bombing as the reason for the American retaliatory raids on Tripoli and Benghazi on April 15.


End of Document