U.S. CLAIMS RIGHT TO BOMB NATIONS' PROPERTY AS WELL AS TERRORISTS'
St. Louis Post-Dispatch (Missouri)
February 8, 1999, Monday, FIVE STAR LIFT EDITION


Copyright 1999 St. Louis Post-Dispatch, Inc.
Section: NEWS, Pg. A5
Length: 433 words
Byline: The Associated Press
Dateline: WASHINGTON
Body


The Clinton administration now asserts the right to bomb government facilities in nations that provide sanctuary to international terrorists. The policy marks a significant shift in U.S. efforts to thwart terrorism.
"We may not just go in a strike against a terrorist facility; we may choose to retaliate against the facilities of the host country, if that host country is a knowing, cooperative sanctuary," said Richard Clarke, the administration's coordinator for counterterrorism.
Clarke's comments came in an interview last week with The Associated Press. The policy marks a departure from the tactics used last August when U.S. cruise missiles struck sites in Afghanistan and Sudan. The airstrikes were aimed specifically at terrorist strongholds.
Now the administration contends it might broaden such attacks to include government buildings and assets in nations that knowingly harbor terrorists.
The Clinton administration has repeatedly warned nations that protect terrorist groups.
"Countries that persistently host terrorists have no right to be safe havens," President Bill Clinton said on Aug. 20, the day the United States launched scores of cruise missiles at suspected terrorist targets in Afghanistan and Sudan.
Before Clarke's comments, no one in the administration had made the leap from a general denunciation of harboring terrorists to an explicit threat that governments may find their own facilities attacked if they give refuge to terrorists.
The airstrikes on Aug. 20 were targeted to avoid government buildings and were aimed at the assets of alleged terrorist Osama bin Laden, an exiled Saudi millionaire who is thought to be hiding in Afghanistan. He is accused of being behind the bombings last summer of U.S. embassies in Kenya and Tanzania.
In Afghanistan, U.S. officials said their missiles struck a remote "terrorist university." In Khartoum, Sudan, cruise missiles struck a privately owned pharmaceutical plant that was suspected of producing a precursor for nerve gas.
White House officials emphasized at the time that the missile strikes were not aimed at the governments of Sudan and Afghanistan.
One administration official described the change in policy as a recent addition to options Washington could use in the war against terror. But others said they didn't consider Clarke's comments a change in U.S. policy.
The administration's policy on terrorism is rooted in international law involving an enemy who seeks sanctuary in a neutral country, says David Tucker. He wrote a classified report on terrorism while at the Pentagon during the Bush and Clinton administrations.

Load-Date: July 7, 1999


End of Document