U.S. Sending A Convict Back to Yemen
The New York Times
November 25, 2008 Tuesday
Late Edition - Final


Copyright 2008 The New York Times Company
Section: Section A; Column 0; National Desk; Pg. 23
Length: 274 words
Byline: By THE ASSOCIATED PRESS
Dateline: WASHINGTON 
Body


Osama bin Laden's former driver is being transferred from the United States detention facility at Guantanamo Bay, Cuba, to his home country, Yemen, a senior defense official said Monday.
  The detainee, Salim Hamdan, was convicted in August of aiding Al Qaeda and sentenced to five and one-half years in prison. Mr. Hamdan would be eligible for release in January with credit for time served.
  The official, who spoke on condition of anonymity because of the sensitive nature of the matter, said Mr. Hamdan would serve the rest of his sentence in Yemen.
  A jury of six military officers sentenced Mr. Hamdan at Guantanamo's first war-crimes trial. At the time he had already served five years and a month there.
  Pentagon officials had suggested all along that they could hold the 40-year-old Guantanamo prisoner indefinitely regardless of the sentence. The Pentagon reserves the right to hold him and other ''enemy combatants'' considered dangerous to the United States, even those who are acquitted or complete sentences in the tribunal system.
  Guantanamo prosecutors had sought a sentence of 30 years to life for Mr. Hamdan. They had also argued that as an ''enemy combatant'' he should not receive credit for his time detained there. A military judge rejected that argument.
  While convicted of supporting terrorism, Mr. Hamdan was acquitted by a jury of military officers of providing missiles to Al Qaeda and knowing his work would be used for terrorism. He was cleared of being part of Al Qaeda's conspiracy to attack the United States.
  Mr. Hamdan's defense lawyers did not immediately respond to messages requesting comment on his release.

http://www.nytimes.com

Load-Date: November 25, 2008


End of Document