U.S. Sees Impasse In Dispute Over Qatar
The New York Times
July 7, 2017 Friday
Late Edition - Final


Copyright 2017 The New York Times Company
Section: Section A; Column 0; Foreign Desk; Pg. 8
Length: 504 words
Byline: By GARDINER HARRIS
Body


WASHINGTON -- The Trump administration warned on Thursday that a festering dispute between Qatar and its fellow Arab neighbors is at an impasse.
''We believe that this could potentially drag on for weeks. It could drag on for months. It could possibly even intensify,'' said Heather Nauert, a spokeswoman for the State Department. And in a joint statement, Saudi Arabia, the United Arab Emirates, Egypt and Bahrain said Qatar ''has worked to thwart the efforts and diplomatic efforts to resolve the crisis.'' 
  The dispute among the mostly Sunni Muslim nations puts a host of top United States priorities at risk, including the effort to defeat the Islamic State and rebuild portions of Iraq and Syria that have been devastated by three years of fighting.
  Riyadh, Abu Dhabi, Cairo and Manama last month announced an embargo against Qatar to punish Doha for what the four capitals called its support for terrorism. It was largely the work of the Saudi defense minister, Mohammed bin Salman, who was elevated several weeks later to become Saudi Arabia's new crown prince, and revealed fissures within the Trump administration.
  Initially, Secretary of State Rex W. Tillerson largely sided with Qataris but did not give specific recommendations for resolving the crisis. President Trump, by contrast, has sided with the Saudis, and accused Qatar of being a ''funder of terrorism at a very high level.''
  At odds with his own president, Mr. Tillerson has largely washed his hands of the impasse, saying the nations should work out a resolution on their own.
  As a former chief executive of Exxon Mobil, Mr. Tillerson has extensive contacts in the Middle East but has been unable to use his experience to resolve the dispute.
  The four countries have since created a list of demands for Qatar to meet before the embargo is lifted, including shuttering the news network Al Jazeera and abandoning ties with Islamist organizations. But few in the region believe Doha could accede to most of them.
  The Saudis have shown few signs of relenting. But Senator Bob Corker, Republican from Tennessee and chairman of the Senate Foreign Relations Committee, has pledged to delay arms sales to several of the countries -- including Saudi Arabia, which agreed in May to buy to $110 billion in weapons -- until the dispute is resolved.
  In the meantime, Qatar's relations with Shiite-led Iran have prospered, with Tehran providing the tiny Persian Gulf nation with fresh produce.
  On Thursday, Ms. Nauert praised a Kuwaiti effort to mediate the dispute and said that Mr. Tillerson ''has made himself available to all sides of this matter.''
  ''We believe that overall, the fight against terrorism is something that will bring all these countries together eventually, because we still have that shared fight. And I think all the nations recognize that,'' Ms. Nauert said.
  The State Department announced late Thursday night that Mr. Tillerson would travel next week to Kuwait, where negotiations between Qatar and the four Arab nations are ongoing.

https://www.nytimes.com/2017/07/06/us/politics/us-says-dispute-between-qatar-and-its-neighbors-is-at-impasse.html

Load-Date: July 7, 2017


End of Document