U.S. POLICY TOWARD TURKEY
The New York Times
December 13, 1981, Sunday, Late City Final Edition


Copyright 1981 The New York Times Company
Section: Section 4; Page 29, Column 1; Editorial Desk; op-ed
Length: 848 words
Byline: By Pierre Schori; Pierre Schori, international secretary of the Swedish Social Democratic Party, headed a party delegation that visited Turkey during the last week in November.
Dateline: STOCKHOLM
Body


At a time when the United States is offering a large package of military aid to Turkey and calling for increased defense cooperation between the two countries, there is growing concern in Europe over the apparent reluctance of the military junta to take concrete steps toward the restoration of democracy, which it promised from the very beginning of its rule, on Sept. 12, 1980.
The Council of Europe, an organization of 21 Western European democratic countries, which forced the junta in Athens to withdraw Greece's membership, is considering suspending Turkey. The Danish and Norwegian Governments recently froze financial aid to the junta, and the European Economic Community has suspended an aid package of $600 million.
The United States' attitude seems to be going in a quite different direction. On Feb. 21, the commander of the North Atlantic Treaty Organization, Gen. Bernard W. Rogers, urged $5 billion to $6 billion in aid to modernize Turkey's armed forces. In fiscal 1980, American aid to Turkey totaled $450 million; in 1981, it was $547 million, and for fiscal 1982, President Reagan has asked Congress for $703 million, of which $403 million is military assistance. Secretary of Defense Caspar W. Weinberger's recent praise of the junta did more for an Orwellian ''1984'' than for democracy.
Pierre Schori discusses US policy towards Turkey; asserts ruling military junta has been reluctant to restore democracy
America hopes to restore stability in Turkey, but there can be neither stability nor security when stagnation and oppression are the main characteristics of a regime. The demise of the Greek junta is evidence of this.
Today, 15 months after the coup, democracy is not being consolidated in Turkey, only dictatorship and arbitrary military law, leaving all power in the hands of the National Security Council.  Furthermore, we can discern the foundations of a coming totalitarian society in which the military formally may withdraw to the barracks but retain power through a number of institutions and bodies that it controls. Thus, university autonomy has been crushed, a State Supervisory Council with sweeping powers to monitor the functioning of all state institutions and organizations has been established, an oppressive labor law is in the making, military control over education and justice has been imposed, parties and independent trade unions have been abolished, and the press has been muffled.
The handpicked Constituent Assembly has no power. ''Terrorism in the streets has been stopped, it is true, but it was replaced by state terrorism,'' I was told in Turkey recently. The main idea behind Turkey's alignment with Europe was to modernize the society through Western European influence. The irony is that Turkey is influencing Europe by the generals' introduction of methods borrowed from Latin America. Systematic torture is rampant against political and trade-union dissidents.
One center of torture is the Otagi Humayun building in the Davutpasa barracks in Ankara. According to Amnesty International, at least 20 people have died, nationwide, after torture. Death sentences are demanded by the hundreds, even surpassing standards in some Latin-American countries. All 52 accused in the coming trial of the leaders of the Confederation of Revolutionary Trade Unions are threatened with execution, as is the former Mayor of Istanbul, Ahmet Isvan, a Social Democrat, accused of having given the federation ''ideological leadership.''
Political prisoners fill the jails -there are at least 30,000. I met two journalists, Ilhan Akalin and Metin Culhaoglu, who were sentenced to seven and a half years for having published ''Marxist articles'' before the coup and who were waiting to go to prison.  Everything is taken away from prisoners and their families. The regime is selling all the belongings and buildings of banned organizations, including a trade-union summer camp.
Bulent Ecevit, a former Prime Minister, who is serving a four-month prison term for criticizing the use of torture and lack of freedom, said before the coup that the economic model introduced by the conservative Finance Minister Turgut Ozal (now Deputy Prime Minister) was incompatible with democracy, mainly because such a ''Friedmanite'' recipe presupposed drastic limitations of union rights. There is now a growing suspicion, in opposition circles, that the coup served political and economic ends.
The Turks don't want to be treated as a second-class nation. They want the same democratic criteria applied to them as to Western Europeans and Americans. They want those who insist upon supporting the junta for strategic reasons to say so openly instead of playing along with the military's sham democracy. Turkish journalists who recently visited the United States told me in Turkey that the Pentagon would like to place the Rapid Deployment Force in their country. They also heard the following argument there: ''In Europe, your religion is democracy. Ours is stability.'' Not a very comforting view for a Turkish democrat to hear, nor for a Greek, Portuguese, or Spanish one.


End of Document