U.S. mistrust of fundamentalist Islam will take a while to erase
St. Petersburg Times (Florida)
May 26, 1992, Tuesday, City Edition


Times Publishing Company
Section: NATIONAL; Pg.  2A; COLUMN
Length: 927 words
Byline: JACK R. PAYTON
Dateline: WASHINGTON
Body


Most Americans I know don't get out of joint over evangelical Christianity or Orthodox Judaism, so why do a lot of them get up-tight at the mere mention of "Islamic fundamentalism?"
 
    Put another way, why are so many Americans even those who consider themselves especially tolerant still uncomfortable with Islam in general and very particularly with its fundamentalist variation?
 
    To give you an idea of just how far this mistrust business can go, the head of the Central Intelligence Agency told Congress recently that his organization considers Islamic fundamentalism a potential threat to America's way of life. As such, said CIA chief Robert Gates, the spy agency was spending a lot of time and money keeping track of what Islamic fundamentalists were up to around the world.
 
    What Gates was really talking about wasn't Islamic fundamentalism itself, of course. Its faults may be many, but as far as I know nobody has seriously accused the CIA of religious discrimination, at least not yet.
   No, what Gates had in mind was the terrorism and violence that many Americans rightly or wrongly associate with Islamic fundamentalism.
 
    Especially in the last dozen or so years, you mention Islamic fundamentalism and the first things many Americans think of are suicide bombers and hostage takers in Lebanon, airline hijackers, the poisonously anti-American Ayatollah Ruhollah Khomeini or his wild-eyed followers storming the U.S. Embassy in Tehran.
 
    These are all very painful associations, so painful that it's more than understandable that one of the things that ties them all together fundamentalist Islam has come to be so mistrusted, even despised, here in America.
 
    Few people are more aware of this than Hassan Turabi, a well-dressed, seemingly mild-mannered scholar who happens to be one of the most influential people in the world even though you've probably never heard of him.
 
    Turabi is secretary-general of the International Popular Arabic Islamic Conference in the African nation of Sudan. While that may not sound like such a big deal, Turabi's position makes him the power behind the government in Sudan.
 
    More important as far as we're concerned, Turabi is one of the most influential thinkers in Islamic fundamentalism today. When he talks about the relationship between religion and the conduct of government, hundreds of millions of Muslims around the world listen.
 
    Turabi visited Washington recently to spread the word about Islamic fundamentalism and one of those who trooped over to hear him was your faithful, though non-Islamic, newspaper columnist.
 
    Turabi has a reputation for being among the more tolerant of fundamentalist thinkers. Christians and Jews are okay, he says, as long as they believe in God and practice their religion. Women must be accorded their dignity and that means letting them go into the workplace beside men.
 
    All of this sounds very modern and liberal and pluralistic until Turabi starts taking hard questions from people who have seen his brand of fundamentalism in action.
 
    One such person is Azizah Hibri, a thoroughly modern Muslim woman who is a member of the American Muslim Council Advisory Board, a law professor and a practicing lawyer in New York and Washington. She asked Turabi a simple question: In his brand of Islam, can a woman be head of a family or even a head of state?
 
    "Unless he is incompetent, the husband must preside," Turabi answered. "The man is the leader of the group. He must be the provider, so he must be the leader. A woman can be a judge, she can lead prayers, she can be a member of parliament. But a man must be the leader."
 
    Next question.
 
    Herman Eilts, the former U.S. ambassador to Saudi Arabia who has served in diplomatic posts throughout the Middle East, asked this: Can we count on Islamic governments not to take hostages, storm embassies or support terrorism?
 
    "Islam invented the concept of diplomatic treaties 1,200 years ago," Turabi answered. "But I don't claim that all Muslims are perfect."
 
    As for supporting terrorism, Turabi said terrorists in the Middle East learned everything they know from Europeans.
 
    Next question.
 
    Eilts again: Will the West have to accommodate to Islam or vice-versa?
 
    "We would like the West to surrender something," Turabi said.  "By surrender, I mean the structures have to be more democratic than they are. The loans, the trade, must be expanded. The new equation must be more equitable."
 
    Turabi came to Washington to show America what might be called the "reasonable face" of Islamic fundamentalism. He even traded in his customary flowing robes and turban for a well-cut European suit to put his Western listeners at ease.
 
    But after listening to him talk and answer questions for two hours at the Center for Strategic and International Studies, one of Washington's many think tanks, I came away convinced that Turabi was preaching to the unconverted, maybe even the unconvertibles.
 
    Maybe it was the fact that Amnesty International, the human rights organization, has documented systematic torture and human rights abuses by the government Turabi supports in Sudan. Maybe it was the presence of human rights pickets outside the building where he spoke.
 
    Whatever it was, the mistrust sown in the West by Iran's Ayatollah Khomeini and his many followers, especially Lebanon's Hezbollah terrorists, will take a long time to overcome.
 
    And it also will take a much more convincing argument than the one Turabi trotted out in Washington the other day.

Load-Date: November 3, 1992


End of Document