U.S.: Terrorist attacks increased last year; That was due partly to new ways of tracking violence, but the war in Iraq also was cited.
The Philadelphia Inquirer
April 21, 2006 Friday


Copyright 2006 Philadelphia Newspapers, LLC All Rights Reserved


Section: NATIONAL; Pg. A08
Length: 449 words
Byline: Warren P. Strobel, Inquirer Washington Bureau
Body


The number of terrorist attacks documented by U.S. intelligence agencies rose sharply in 2005, passing the 10,000 mark for the first time, according to U.S. counterterrorism officials and documents obtained by the Inquirer Washington Bureau.
Officials caution that much of the increase, set to be reported publicly next week, stems from a change last year in how terror attacks are counted, coupled with a more aggressive effort to tally such violence worldwide.
But the documents say, and officials confirm, that some of the rise is traceable to the war in Iraq, where foreign terrorists, a homegrown insurgency and sectarian strife all have contributed to political bloodshed.
More than half the fatalities from terrorism worldwide last year occurred in Iraq, said a counterterrorism official, who spoke on condition of anonymity because the data have not been made public. About 85 percent of the U.S. citizens who died from terrorism during the year died in Iraq.
The figures cover only noncombatants, not combat deaths of U.S., Iraqi and other coalition forces.
"There's no question that the level of terrorist attacks in Iraq was up substantially," said the official, who is familiar with the methods used by the National Counterterrorism Center to track terrorist trends. The center is part of the U.S. intelligence community.
There were 3,192 terrorist attacks in 2004, the center reported last July.
Last year, while compiling the 2004 numbers, analysts switched to a dramatically broadened definition of what constituted terrorism. Analysts used the new method for all of the 2005 data.
In the past, intelligence analysts had counted only "international terrorism," defined as attacks involving citizens or territory of more than one country. But officials concluded that the definition was outdated and undercounted terrorism.
The latest figures will be released in conjunction with the State Department's annual report on terrorism, which covers broader trends.
U.S. government officials and many private analysts say that, while the data are useful in analyzing trends, numbers alone provide only a limited portrait of how the struggle against terrorism is going.
State Department counterterrorism coordinator Henry Crumpton told Congress earlier this month that the leadership of al-Qaeda "may be isolated and under pressure, unable to communicate effectively."
But, Crumpton told a Senate Foreign Relations subcommittee, regional terrorist groups have established their own independent networks, a development that in some ways "poses even more daunting intelligence collection and strategic policy challenges."
Contact reporter Warren P. Strobel at 202-383-6033 or wstrobel@krwashington.com.

Load-Date: April 21, 2006


End of Document