U.S. and Russia May Share Intelligence Services
The New York Times
October 19, 1992, Monday, Late Edition - Final


Copyright 1992 The New York Times Company
Distribution: Foreign Desk
Section: Section A;; Section A; Page 6; Column 4; Foreign Desk; Column 4;
Length: 363 words
Byline: Reuters
Dateline: MOSCOW, Oct. 18
Body


The United States Embassy announced today that Russia and the United States might pool intelligence services.
Possible fields include nuclear non-proliferation and the fight against terrorism, drug smuggling and organized crime, the embassy said in a statement after a visit here by the head of the C.I.A.
The embassy said the Director of Central Intelligence, Robert M. Gates, had met several top Russian officials during his three-day visit, including President Boris N. Yeltsin. It was the first time a Russian leader had met with the head of the C.I.A., an agency that epitomized Washington's distrust of Moscow during the cold war.
"Possibilities of contact and joint activity between the Russian and American intelligence services were discussed," the embassy said. "Both sides were satisfied with the results."
Mr. Gates also met with Yevgeny M. Primakov, head of the Russian Foreign Intelligence Service, and with Lieut. Gen. Fyodor Ladygin, head of Russian military intelligence.
The embassy gave no other details about the meetings, nor about earlier stops by Mr. Gates in Warsaw and Budapest.
Mr. Primakov was appointed head of foreign intelligence a year ago, when the Soviet Union still existed and its President, Mikhail S. Gorbachev wanted to separate that branch from the K.G.B. security police.
 
A Russian Thaw
 Last November, Mr. Primakov said he wanted to work with spy services abroad to stamp out terrorism and drug trafficking. He also startled some analysts two weeks ago when he offered to stop espionage operations against any country that pledged to cease spying on Russia.
The suggestion, which attracted little attention in the West, could be a sign Moscow wants to relieve the burden on its overstretched intelligence services.
At the height of its powers, Soviet intelligence maintained a network of agents who are believed to have penetrated the top levels of political, military and commercial decision-making in many Western countries.
On Friday Mr. Gates gave President Yeltsin information on one of the most costly and secretive intelligence operations, the recovery of the bodies of six sailors from a Soviet submarine that sank in 1968 in the mid-Pacific.

Load-Date: October 19, 1992


End of Document