U.S. must compromise, Blair says
 The Philadelphia Inquirer
JANUARY 27, 2005 Thursday CITY-D EDITION


Copyright 2005 Philadelphia Newspapers, LLC  All Rights Reserved


Section: NATIONAL; Pg. A03
Length: 420 words
Byline: Robert Wielaard ASSOCIATED PRESS
Dateline: DAVOS, Switzerland
Body


British Prime Minister Tony Blair said yesterday that the United States must do more to address the concerns of the rest of the world if it expected support for its own policies, citing global warming as a prime example.
"If America wants the rest of the world to be part of the agenda it has set, it must be part of their agenda, too," he told the annual meeting of the World Economic Forum, a gathering of 2,500 political and business leaders.
Blair and French President Jacques Chirac, who appeared on a video link, urged the world's richest nations to provide billions of dollars to help developing countries combat AIDS, poverty and natural disasters.
Blair's sharp comments directed at the United States came at a time of growing public anger in Britain over his support for President Bush in Iraq.
Alluding to one of the key issues dividing the United States from Europe and much of the world, Blair said: "I support the Kyoto Protocol. Others will not . . . but business and the global economy need to know this isn't an issue that is going away."
Blair said Bush's inaugural speech last week indicated "there is a wish to reunify" in Washington.
The World Economic Forum has taken on increased importance in recent years as globalization and common threats - from terrorism to increased vulnerability to natural disasters - have made nations more dependent on one another.
Chirac alluded to such interdependence, saying that natural disasters, political unrest, uncontrolled migration and extremism were "breeding grounds for terrorism."
Blair and Chirac said large-scale aid for the poor could make the world a more stable place, but they outlined different scenarios on how to get there.
Chirac suggested in his video message from Paris that rich nations raise billions of aid dollars through new taxes and other measures.
Referring to the Dec. 26 tsunami, he said: "The world suffers chronically from what has been strikingly called the 'silent tsunamis.' Famine. Infectious diseases that decimate the life force of entire continents."
Britain wants rich nations to set a timetable for raising development aid and more countries to join the "International Finance Facility," which is designed to double aid to Africa.
While Chirac focused largely on global poverty, Blair also touched on terrorism as well as global warming.
Bush has worked hard to rally international opinion behind the fight against terrorism, but his administration has opposed the 1997 Kyoto climate-change agreement, arguing it would hurt U.S. industry.

Load-Date: September 6, 2005


End of Document