U.S. WARNS ENERGY FIRMS ABOUT TERRORIST ATTACKS
St. Louis Post-Dispatch (Missouri)
February 6, 1989, MONDAY, FIVE STAR Edition


Copyright 1989 St. Louis Post-Dispatch, Inc.
Section: NEWS; Pg. 6A
Length: 521 words
Body


WASHINGTON (AP) - The Energy Department is warning U.S. energy companies of a growing threat of terrorist attacks on their domestic plants and equipment, The Associated Press has learned.  At the same time, a special interagency task force has been set up within the National Security Council to review the vulnerabilit y of U.S. energy systems and to study ways to reduce the risk of disruptions caused by saboteurs.  ''Energy-related terrorism in the United States would be a particularly significant threat'' in a military crisis with the Soviet Union, said an internal Energy Department report obtained by The Associated Press.  ''However, even in the absence of a superpower confrontation, there is the possibility that potential Third World adversaries could sponsor attacks on the energy infrastructure in the United States,'' the report said.  The report was prepared for Congress in December 1987, but it was withheld because of its sensitive nature. A sanitized version was made public last year.  Security concerns also are cited by department officials who decline to discuss the report publicly but acknowledge that the material it contains remains valid.  A catalyst for the government's campaign, according to department officials and documents, is concern about saboteurs equipped with advanced technology, such as hard-to-detect plastic explosives, hand-held missiles or electronic surveillance gear. The report cited incidents of such terrorism in Europe and elsewhere, but officials said none had been reported in the United States.  The heightened alert also reflects a fear of retaliatory strikes by Libya and Iran, countries accused by the United States of supporting terrorism.
Electric power companies, considered the most vulnerable segment of the industry, have begun acting on the warnings, according to sources familiar with ongoing discussions between industry and government.  Other energy businesses, including the oil industry, have been reluctant to join the program, according to the sources, who spoke on condition of anonymity.  In a meeting with Energy Department officials about the program last month, oil company executives expressed concern about potential antitrust and conflict-of-interest problems, according to Marshall Nichols, executive director of the National Petroleum Council.  (THE FOLLOWING TEXT RAN ONLY IN THE 3* EDITIONS) The Nuclear Regulatory Commission imposed new measures last December on plants it operates. The measures are designed to strengthen protection against terrorist attacks at plants handling weapon-grade nuclear materials. The measures were not applied to nuclear power plants.  Edward V. Badolato, deputy assistant secretary for energy emergencies, declined to answer questions about the anti-terrorism policy. He told Congress last year, however, that the Energy Department began passing on intelligence agency ''threat advisories'' in 1987 to key industry trade organizations.  Badolato is scheduled to testify Wednesday before the Senate Governmental Affairs Committee, which is reviewing the Energy Department's efforts to respond to acts of sabotage.

Load-Date: October 23, 1993


End of Document