U.S. pressures Saudis to block terrorism funds
 Philadelphia Inquirer
November 27, 2002 Wednesday CITY-D EDITION


Copyright 2002 Philadelphia Newspapers, LLC  All Rights Reserved


Section: NATIONAL; Pg. A10
Length: 569 words
Byline: By Barry Schweid; Associated Press
Dateline: WASHINGTON
Body


The Bush administration is stepping up pressure on Saudi Arabia to block the flow of money to terrorists, and working groups throughout the U.S. government are considering ways to tighten controls worldwide.
"The President believes that Saudi Arabia has been a good partner in the war against terrorism, but even a good partner like Saudi Arabia can do more," White House spokesman Ari Fleischer said yesterday.
The U.S. drive, which extends beyond Saudi Arabia to several other countries, is being taken with care. The administration wants support from the Arab monarchy in the event of war with Saudi Arabia's neighbor Iraq, and two senior U.S. officials said the Saudis agreed - "with a wink and a nod" - to help, provided use of their territory was limited.
"We are working continually to find ways to help nations to do more and are exploring concrete ways to do it," Fleischer said.
The working groups, focusing on drying up financial support for terror, have not settled on specific recommendations, and none has been approved, another senior official said.
"But it's appropriate to have a broad group look at a number of options, so it's helpful to have ideas kicked around," Fleischer said.
At the same time, the administration is pressing Saudi Arabia to monitor Islamic charities to make sure contributions do not go to terrorists, another senior official said.
The flow of money from Saudi Arabia and other countries to extremists in Yemen and elsewhere was confirmed, meanwhile, by Abd al-Kareem al-Iryani, special adviser to Yemeni President Ali Abdullah Saleh.
"No Arab government supports extremists," Iryani said at the Brookings Institution. "But there is money in the world coming to these people."
The Yemeni official said Saudi Arabia and other Arab countries had limited banking systems and could not keep track of the contributions. He stressed the financing problem was far bigger than just Saudi Arabia.
Sen. Richard G. Lugar (R., Ind), who becomes chairman of the Senate Foreign Relations Committee in January, said yesterday the United States should insist the Saudis do more to stop the financing of terror, "with the implied threat the United States will take charge of the situation, and we will attempt to impose some controls."
"This is a time that firmness ought to be on the part of the United States," Lugar said.
Meanwhile, Treasury Secretary Paul H. O'Neill and senior officials in his department are reaching out to allies in the Middle East and in Europe to block funds for terror groups.
As terrorist financiers are forced out of traditional banking, they are turning to riskier ways to move money, including smuggling cash and cigarettes; trafficking in diamonds, gold and drugs; and siphoning money from charitable donations, Treasury officials say.
Secretary of Defense Donald H. Rumsfeld said more than $100 million had been frozen worldwide. "We are getting good cooperation," he said at a news conference.
The drive to intercept funds for terror groups was begun months before recent news reports that a charitable contribution by Princess Haifa al-Faisal, wife of the Saudi ambassador to the United States, may indirectly have helped two participants in the Sept. 11 attacks.
U.S. interagency teams have traveled to Saudi Arabia, and the Saudis have sent officials to Washington to help identify groups that may provide funds for terror operations, a senior U.S. official said yesterday.

Load-Date: November 27, 2002


End of Document