U.S. gunning for root causes - 
Brock Press: Brock University
July 15, 2020 Wednesday


University Wire
Copyright 2020 UWIRE via U-Wire All Rights Reserved
Section: ARTS-AND-LIFE; Pg. 1
Length: 602 words
Byline: Emma Kirwin
Body


A commonly heard, if slightly hypocritical, criticism of the United States' policy towards Iraq is that it has distracted the world from the more important "war on terrorism." The criticism is common because it is on the tongue of most liberal anti-Americans; hypocritical, because these same liberals opposed the war on terrorism at its inception. In truth, the idea that the U.S. must choose between fighting Saddam and hunting down Osama is a false dichotomy. There is no compelling reason why a nation of America's might cannot do both. Furthermore, if we step back from immediate actions for a moment, it will become apparent that both are campaigns within a larger war.No one doubts, given heavy newspaper and television coverage, that U.S. preparations to liberate Iraq are well under way. A few hundred thousand troops are stationed in the Gulf already, and more are on the way. In foreign policy circles, where the debate about whether or not to invade Iraq ended several months ago, discussion has now progressed beyond the actual means of invading to post-war occupation planning. The U.S. has devoted considerable resources and policy time to the Iraq question.
And yet, just last week we hear of the greatest coup so far in the war on terror, the capture of Khalid Sheikh Mohammed. This man had been trailed and monitored by the CIA and Pakistani intelligence services for several weeks, and was taken with extensive computer material relevant to al-Qaeda's activities and personnel. Even if Khalid reveals little under interrogation, the shock of his capture will reverberate through the al-Qaeda superstructure, causing agents to sell compromised safe-houses and frantically seek to re-establish a chain of command. The opportunity to crack several more terror cells has presented itself, and we can be sure that the U.S. will not neglect it.
Thus it is apparent that the U.S. and its allies can simultaneously undertake two elaborate intelligence and planning initiatives. Even as we congratulate them, it would be a mistake to conclude that America and the West are currently engaged in two wars. In fact, just as the enemy in Iraq and formerly in Afghanistan is one and the same, these al-Qaeda and Saddam are merely two campaigns in a great war.
The Peloponnesian War has been presented by V. D. Hanson as an analogue to the current world situation. He persuasively writes of how that war was regarded at the time as a series of independent conflicts. It was the brilliance of the great Greek historian Thucydides to recognize that all the small conflicts of that time were best understood as one grand war between radical democracy and conservative oligarchy. Please read the whole of his argument at www.nationalreview.com/hanson/hanson022103.asp.
The same sort of grand war of ideals is being waged in the world of today. Al-Qaeda struck the World Trade Center twice, bombed synagogues in Tunisia, destroyed a nightclub in Bali and have been thwarted in many other attempts. Campaigns in Afghanistan, Pakistan, the Philippines and wherever else the war takes us are the defensive measures of Western civilization, protecting itself and the liberty for which it stands.
How does Iraq fit into this framework? The U.S. is going for the root causes of terror, just as so many have demanded. Repression that drives men to despair, corruption that leads to impoverishment, and evil that breeds violence are the root causes of terrorism. A liberated Iraq will be a beacon of hope in the hopeless Middle-East, and a democratic government by the good people of Iraq will create wealth and live in peace.

Load-Date: July 16, 2020


End of Document