U.S. Adds Companies and Syrian Officials to Sanction List
The New York Times
July 19, 2012 Thursday
The New York Times on the Web


Copyright 2012 The New York Times Company
Section: Section ; Column 0; National Desk; Pg. 
Length: 348 words
Byline: By EDWARD WYATT
Body


WASHINGTON -- The Treasury Department on Wednesday added 29 Syrian government officials and six companies with links to the regime of President Bashar al-Assad to its list of entities subject to sanctions, including an asset freeze and business restrictions.
Among the senior Syrian officials are the ministers of justice and finance, other members of Mr. Assad's cabinet, and the governor of the Syrian Central Bank, who the Treasury said has tried to evade earlier sanctions imposed by the United States. Previously, the administration has imposed sanctions on more than 100 individuals and companies, as well as the government of Syria, its central bank and government-owned oil companies.
''Today's actions reflect the unwavering commitment of the United States to pressure the Assad regime to end the carnage and relinquish power,'' said David S. Cohen, undersecretary for terrorism and financial intelligence. ''As long as Assad stays in power, the bloodshed and instability in Syria will only mount, and we will continue working with our partners in the international community to ensure that the inevitable political transition occurs as rapidly as possible.''
The Treasury actionsfreeze any assets the individuals or entities may hold in the United States and prohibit American citizens or companies from dealing with them.
The companies designated for sanctions on Wednesday include several that the Treasury said ''are being used to advance the regime's proliferation efforts'' and which are linked to the agency responsible ''for developing and producing nonconventional weapons and the missiles to deliver them.'' The companies are Industrial Solutions; Mechanical Construction Factory; Handasieh, also known as General Organization for Engineering Industries; Business Lab; and Syrian Arab Company for Electronic Industries, also known as Syronics.
Also designated for sanctions was Drex Technologies, based in Tortola, British Virgin Islands, and owned, the Treasury Department said, by Mr. Assad's cousin, Rami Makhluf. Mr. Makhluf was personally designated for sanctions in 2008.

http://www.nytimes.com

Load-Date: July 19, 2012


End of Document