U.S. report on terrorism goes easier on Cuba But the country is still on a list of sponsors, alongside Syria and Iran.
St. Louis Post-Dispatch (Missouri)
May 31, 2013 Friday
THIRD EDITION


Copyright 2013 St. Louis Post-Dispatch, Inc. All Rights Reserved
Section: NEWS; Pg. A10
Length: 478 words
Byline: By Paul Richter Tribune Washington Bureau
Body


WASHINGTON • Cuba further distanced itself from terrorist activities last year but the U.S. government still considers it a state sponsor of terrorism along with Syria, Iran and Sudan, according to the State Department's annual report on terrorism.
The report for 2012, released Thursday, says the government in Cuba last year reduced support for Basque separatists in southern Europe, joined a regional group that seeks to block terrorism financing, and sponsored peace talks between Colombia and an armed rebel group.
The report found "no indication that the Cuban government provided weapons or paramilitary training to terrorist groups."
Countries listed by the State Department as state sponsors of terrorism face economic and political sanctions, including U.S. opposition to any aid from the International Monetary Fund and other major financial institutions.
Critics contend that Cuba's inclusion on the list is not justified and reflects the views of members of Congress opposed to the Communist leaders in Havana. State Department officials are not considering removing Cuba, which has been under a U.S. economic embargo since 1962, from the list.
"The report makes it clear that the State Department doesn't really believe that Cuba is a state sponsor of terrorism," said Geoff Thale, program director at the Washington Office on Latin America, a liberal advocacy group. "Cuba is clearly on the terrorist list for political reasons."
Cuba still shelters about two dozen members of the Basque Fatherland and Liberty, one of the terrorist groups on the list, according to the report. But Havana has reduced its support for the group and no longer provides its members with travel documents, the report says.
Cuba also has provided haven for members of the Revolutionary Armed Forces of Colombia, known by its Spanish initials FARC . But last November, Cuba began hosting peace talks between the Colombian government and the rebels.
Washington faulted Cuba in the past for doing too little to prevent money laundering and international terrorist financing. But last year Cuba joined the Financial Action Task Force of South America, an intergovernmental group that seeks to enforce U.S.-supported standards on such illicit activities.
Cuba's shift reflects changes in the country's leadership and a preoccupation with internal economic problems, analysts say.
The report said there was a sharp increase in Iran's sponsorship of terrorism around the world, including attacks or attempted attacks in India, Thailand, Georgia and Kenya.
The State Department added three terrorist groups to the list: Jemmah Anshorut Tauhid, of Indonesia; the Abdallah Azzam Brigades, of Lebanon and the Arabian Peninsula; and the Haqqani Network, of Afghanistan and Pakistan. It removed one group from the list, the Mujahedeen Khalq, or MEK, an Iranian opposition group based primarily in Iraq.

Load-Date: May 31, 2013


End of Document