U.S. can learn to live with threat of terrorism
The Pantagraph (Bloomington, IL)
October 29, 2001, Monday


Copyright 2001 The Pantagraph
Section: Editorial; Pg. A10
Length: 367 words
Body


Among reasons why the terrorist attacks of Sept. 11 and subsequent anthrax incidents have left this country shaken is our lack of experience dealing with such adversity.
There hasn't been a war fought in the continental United States since the Civil War. Even World War II was largely a foreign war. When Pearl Harbor was attacked, Hawaii was not a state. Terrorist incidents on U.S. soil have been rare.
When President Bush asks Americans to be cautious and alert, but go about our daily business, a disbelieving public wonders how to do both. But other countries have shown it can be done.
Israel has been in a near constant state of war since its inception in 1948. Even when not engaged in conventional war on battlefields, it has faced terrorist bombings and shootings throughout its history.
Yet, people there go about their daily business - even as the government issues upgraded gas masks to its citizenry and children go through emergency drills.
Israelis have learned that retreating to a bunker mentality would stifle their nation's progress and provide their enemies with a victory of sorts.
Similarly, Americans must - and will - learn to live in this new era.
We will learn to accept increased security and the inconvenience that often accompanies it. But we should not yield our civil liberties too freely. We will learn not to overreact to "mysterious white powder" next to a sugar bowl. But we should learn to recognize real threats.
Already signs of normalcy are returning. There are fewer empty seats on planes, for example. Attendance at major sporting events seems normal.
We face risks every day, just getting behind the wheels of our cars to drive to work or the store. But we have learned to deal with such known risks. It is the unknown risks posed by unseen terrorists that scare us.
As we become better informed about real risks, as opposed to perceived dangers, and better understand how to protect ourselves and others, the pace toward normalcy will quicken.
Let's hope that terrorism never becomes so commonplace here that Americans shrug it off the way we dismiss the risks of traffic accidents. But let's work to end the near-paralyzing fear some people have exhibited since Sept. 11.

Load-Date: October 30, 2001


End of Document