U.S. SAYS PAKISTANI TERROR GROUP CHANGED NAMES BUT NOT GOALS
Pittsburgh Post-Gazette (Pennsylvania)
December 23, 2007 Sunday
FIVE STAR EDITION


Copyright 2007 P.G. Publishing Co.
Section: WORLD; Pg. A-4
Length: 539 words
Byline: JOSH MEYER, LOS ANGELES TIMES
Dateline: LAHORE, Pakistan 
Body


While the war against Islamic militancy has focused on shadowy underground organizations such as al-Qaida, counter-terrorism officials say there is a growing worldwide threat from an extremist group operating in plain sight in Pakistan.
The group, formerly known as Lashkar-e-Taiba, or Army of the Righteous, was formed in the late 1980s and, with the support of the Pakistan government, has launched attacks against India in the dispute over Kashmir.
In recent years, the camps that Lashkar once used primarily to train Pakistanis to fight for Kashmir have increasingly become a training ground for other militant groups and extremists who come from around the world to learn guerrilla warfare, according to current and former U.S. and allied counter-terrorism officials.
And as its ranks have swelled by growing anti-U.S. sentiment, they say, there is evidence that the group is working more closely with al-Qaida and other extremist groups and may be getting more directly involved in jihadist activities against the West. They cite evidence in recent years of fundraising or recruiting efforts in Canada, Britain, Australia and the United States, including current probes in Massachusetts and Lodi, Calif.
Lashkar-e-Taiba was designated as a terrorist organization by the United States in December 2001 and was soon outlawed by Pakistan. But it disbanded and its founders created another group named Jamaat ud-Dawa, which functions openly in Pakistan as an officially recognized humanitarian organization.
U.S. authorities consider it one and the same as Lashkar-e-Taiba and say it has continued to operate camps that train militants. The Treasury Department designated Jamaat ud-Dawa as a terrorist organization in April 2006.U.S. counter-terrorism officials say the group's status as a legal organization in Pakistan makes it difficult to oppose. It has thousands of loyal supporters and close ties to a government that has done little to rein it in, they say, which has been a source of tension between the United States and Pakistan.
"The U.S. government ... has voiced its concerns" about Jamaat ud-Dawa to the Islamabad government, said Daniel Markey, who oversaw South Asia policy for the State Department until February. U.S. officials have expressed the view that "the Pakistan government cannot sit by while Islamic extremists continued to win converts and press their agenda," he said.
Pakistani officials said Jamaat ud-Dawa is "under watch," but that the group is legal and separate from Lashkar-e-Taiba, which they insist they have shut down.
Representatives of Jamaat ud-Dawa say they are running a legitimate charity, citing the group's campaign to help Pakistanis recover from a massive earthquake in 2005 and its efforts to provide social services, food, water, medical care and education.
Moreover, Jamaat ud-Dawa spokesman Abdullah Muntazir said the organization does not participate in any jihadist activities or run military training camps.U.S. officials say Pakistan has closed down some of the training camps, but that the camps pop up again elsewhere in secret locations along the borders with India and Afghanistan. Leaders of the group have been detained at times by the government, they say, but only temporarily.

Load-Date: December 25, 2007


End of Document