U.S. DIGEST
St. Louis Post-Dispatch (Missouri)
July 22, 2005 Friday
FIVE STAR LATE LIFT EDITION


Copyright 2005 St. Louis Post-Dispatch, Inc.
Section: NEWS; Pg. A5
Length: 550 words
Byline: FROM NEWS SERVICES
Body


MIAMI
Two pilots get prison for being drunk on job
Two airline pilots who got behind the controls while drunk drew sentences Thursday of 2 1/2 years and five years in prison.
Thomas Cloyd, 47, of Peoria, Ariz., and co-pilot Christopher Hughes, 44, of Leander, Texas, settled into the cockpit in July 2002 after a night of heavy drinking at a sports bar. They were arrested before the America West plane took off for Phoenix but after it had pushed away from the gate. They were found guilty June 8 of operating an aircraft while drunk.
Cloyd was sentenced to five years in prison. Hughes was ordered to serve 2 1/2 years behind bars. He was also sentenced to probation and community service and fined $5,000.
The pilots had been drinking up until about six hours before their departure time, a violation of the federal eight-hour rule. Police stepped in after screeners smelled alcohol on their breath.
MOUNT CLEMENS, Mich.
Teen gets 4 1/2 years for terrorism threat
A teenager accused of plotting a massacre at his suburban Detroit high school was sentenced Thursday to at least 4 1/2 years in prison for threatening terrorism and amassing an arsenal in his home.
"Though he has to pay the piper, we want to give him as much a chance for salvation as we can," Circuit Court Judge Matthew Switalski said in sentencing Andrew Osantowski. Osantowski, 18, wept while the judge spoke.
The case appears to be among the first in the nation in which anti-terrorism laws were applied to school violence, according to law enforcement officials. Osantowski was found guilty last month of threatening an act of terrorism and using a computer to threaten terrorism after authorities found Internet chat room messages in which he wrote that he might kill students at Chippewa Valley High.
He was arrested in September after a girl he had written to in the chat room shared the messages with her father, a police officer.
WASHINGTON
52 at Guantanamo declare hunger strike
Fifty-two prisoners at Guantanamo Bay, Cuba, have declared a hunger strike, military officials said Thursday. They have refused at least nine meals over the last three days, the officials said.
"Indications are that this is a temporary effort by some detainees to protest their continued detention," the military command at the U.S. prison for terrorism suspects said in a statement.
The detainees refusing meals have been given intravenous hydration, Gatorade, water and the nutritional supplement Ensure, the statement says. Some may be admitted to a hospital.
MIAMI
Haitian is convicted in drug smuggling case
A reputed Haitian drug kingpin was convicted Thursday of smuggling and money laundering for guiding shipments of Colombian cocaine through Haiti to the United States and paying off high-ranking officials of the Caribbean nation to protect his activities.
Serge Edouard, 43, faces 20 years to life in prison on the jury's convictions of conspiring to import more than 10 pounds of cocaine into the United States, conspiring to commit money laundering and nine counts of money laundering. Sentencing was set for Sept. 29.
From 1998 to last year, Edouard directed a smuggling organization that imported thousands of pounds of cocaine from Haiti into Miami and New York. Prosecutors said the operation returned millions in drug money to Edouard in Haiti.

Load-Date: July 23, 2005


End of Document