U.S.S. Cole bombing despicable
University Wire
October 16, 2000


Copyright 2000 The Daily Cougar via U-Wire
Section: EDITORIAL
Length: 420 words
Byline: Staff Editorial, The Daily Cougar
Dateline: Houston
Body


At approximately 4:15 a.m. Thursday, Central time, an explosion blew a 20-foot by 40-foot hole in the side of the U.S.S. Cole while the ship was refueling in the port waters of Aden, Yemen. Seventeen U.S. soldiers are dead, and 39 are wounded.
A team of approximately 100 investigators, including FBI agents and explosives experts, is aboard the ship investigating the cause of the blast. Eyewitnesses report seeing a small boat, apparently aiding the Cole in mooring, approach the ship. The two men inside apparently stood up and salute just before the blast.
U. Houston
Secretary of Defense William Cohen is calling the attack an "apparent act of terrorism," and states that if terrorism can be proven, appropriate retaliatory steps will be taken. He refused to say whether this would include an attack on those responsible.
Two Islamic terrorist organizations have already claimed responsibility for the bombing, although their claims are still under investigation. Most believe that the attack is meant as a demonstration of support for Palestine, as daily protests have been held in Aden and the British Consulate was also bombed Friday.
If this is the case, it's not the way to go about showing support for anyone. Attacking U.S. ships and other military installations has never done anything except provoke response attacks, as well it should. Losses in war, while regrettable, are expected, but the United States is not currently at war with anyone, and the conflict between Israel and Palestine is no reason to attack U.S. forces. Terrorism is inexcusable. The only statement an act of terrorism makes is that those committing it are cowardly, vicious people.
Numerous people, both inside and outside the administration, are also saying that the Cole had no business refueling in a terrorist-prone area like Yemen in the first place. Apparently U.S. ships should only stay in safe areas.
Unfortunately, this just doesn't work. The United States is the only remaining superpower in the world. As such, it has global responsibilities, which, as Cohen has said, lead to global risks. Terrorist acts cannot be allowed to dictate U.S. foreign policy. If they do, the acts accomplish just what they intend.
Far from being where it shouldn't, the U.S.S. Cole was exactly where it belonged. Our sympathy should go out to the families and friends of those men and women who died doing their duty, but the dreadfulness of acts like this should never blind us to that fact.
(C) 2000 The Daily Cougar via U-WIRE

Load-Date: October 16, 2000


End of Document