U.S. actions give terrorists excuse to strike, Carter says Ex-president says Guantanamo detentions are an embarrassment
St. Louis Post-Dispatch (Missouri)
July 31, 2005 Sunday
FIVE STAR LIFT EDITION


Copyright 2005 St. Louis Post-Dispatch, Inc.
Section: NEWS; Pg. A10
Length: 356 words
Byline: THE ASSOCIATED PRESS
Dateline: BIRMINGHAM, England 
Body


Former President Jimmy Carter said Saturday the detention of terrorism suspects at the Guantanamo Bay Naval base was an embarrassment and had given extremists an excuse to attack the United States.
Carter also criticized the U.S.-led war in Iraq as "unnecessary and unjust."
"I think what's going on in Guantanamo Bay and other places is a disgrace to the U.S.A.," he said at a news conference at the Baptist World Alliance's centenary conference in Birmingham, England. "I wouldn't say it's the cause of terrorism, but it has given impetus and excuses to potential terrorists to lash out at our country and justify their despicable acts."
Carter said, however, that terrorist acts could not be justified, and that while Guantanamo "may be an aggravating factor . . . it's not the basis of terrorism."
Critics of President George W. Bush's administration have long accused the U.S. government of unjustly detaining terrorism suspects at the Guantanamo Bay Naval Base, on the southeastern tip of Cuba. Hundreds of men have been held indefinitely at the prison, without charge or access to lawyers.
"What has happened at Guantanamo Bay . . . does not represent the will of the American people," Carter said Saturday. "I'm embarrassed about it, I think its wrong. I think it does give terrorists an unwarranted excuse to use the despicable means to hurt innocent people."
Earlier this month, Carter called for the Guantanamo prison to be shut down. He also said that the United States needed to make sure no detainees were held incommunicado and that all were told the charges against them.
Carter, who won the 2002 Nobel Peace Prize, has been an outspoken critic of the Iraq war.
The Baptist World Alliance, comprising more than 200 Baptist unions around the world, was formed in London in 1905. The headquarters of the alliance, which meets in a different location every five years, moved to the United States in 1947.
An estimated 12,700 delegates gathered in the city of Birmingham, in central England, for the conference. Carter, a Sunday school teacher in his hometown of Plains, Ga., was due to lead a Bible study lesson during the conference.

Graphic

 
PHOTO
 PHOTO - Carter  Calls Iraq war "unjust" 

Load-Date: August 1, 2005


End of Document