U.S.-led war only breeds more anger, terrorism
The Pantagraph (Bloomington, IL)
December 21, 2003, Sunday


Copyright 2003 The Pantagraph
Section: Editorial; Pg. C1
Length: 576 words
Byline: John Quigley
Body


President Bush's approach to his self-declared war on terrorism proceeds from the following logic: The terrorists hate us because we espouse democracy. The only way to deal with people willing to kill from that motivation is to get them first.
The president repeated in his announcement of the capture of Saddam Hussein: "We still face terrorists who would rather go on killing the innocent than accept the rise of liberty in the heart of the Middle East."
The problem with the president's logic is his premise. The resentment against the United States that fuels terrorism does not come from a dislike of democracy. It comes from a perception that the United States pursues its interests to the detriment of the region's population.
After World War II, we took over as the power broker in the Middle East. We established cozy relationships with oil-rich governments to ensure ready access to the region's oil.
The CIA intervened in domestic politics to get governments favorable to us. We promoted the Israelis over the Palestinians, because presidents from Harry Truman forward have viewed U.S. policy on Israel through the lens of the next election.
The capture of Saddam Hussein, however much it may be welcomed by many in the Middle East, will not result in gratitude to the United States. It will be viewed as a side effect of an invasion of Iraq motivated by U.S. strategic and economic interests.
While it may be possible to try to refute the basis for the anti-U.S. resentment, the perceptions are sincerely and strongly held. When U.S. policy-makers argue against them, they rarely create converts.
Anti-U.S. terrorism thrives not only because a small number of individuals are willing to give their lives to oppose us, but, more important, because they receive moral approbation, and even direct support, from broad sections of the population, which share the anti-U.S. resentment.
If President Bush were serious about ending anti-U.S. terrorism, he would seek to counteract that resentment. He would ask his Defense Policy Board how to improve the perception of the United States in the Middle East. Changes in U.S. policy in the region would be required.
The recent stepped-up offensives by the U.S. Army in Afghanistan and Iraq only make matters worse for us.
In one weekend in Afghanistan, we killed nine children in one incident, six in another. In Iraq, we detained the wife and daughter of Izzat Ibrahim al-Douri, a former official who was close to Saddam Hussein, in hopes they would reveal the whereabouts of their husband and father.
These offensives may bring short-term benefits, but they turn people against us, generating more terrorists. Arresting family members does not play well, even with Iraqis who hate the former government. The deaths of the children in Afghanistan were dismissed by U.S. Army officials as unfortunate accidents, but the people know that we use tremendous fire power in our operations, making incidental deaths likely.
After ambushes of U.S. soldiers in Iraq, neighborhood children have come out to cheer, and we are dismayed at their cruelty. We don't understand that for many Iraqis, being under outside control offends them and turns people against us.
The source of terror is not a dislike of the Liberty Bell. When President Bush figures that out, he will be able to begin a war against terrorism.
John B. Quigley is a professor of law at Ohio State University. This column was distributed by Knight Ridder Newspapers.

Graphic

 
John Quigley
A photo of Saddam Hussein, on which children had scribbled and marked, was taped to a pole outside a celebration Dec.14 in Dallas, after the U.S. capture of Hussein. The group was celebrating outside the Kurdish Human Rights Watch offices.

Load-Date: January 12, 2004


End of Document