U.S. AID FOR THE P.L.O. AS A BUDGET ITEM
The New York Times
March 4, 1981, Wednesday, Late City Final Edition


Copyright 1981 The New York Times Company
Section: Section A; Page 26, Column 6; Editorial Desk; letter
Length: 476 words
Body


To the Editor:
President Reagan's call for cuts in Government spending should be supported vigorously and enthusiastically. I hope his program will also include sharp cuts in those areas of foreign aid that directly or indirectly provide financing for international terrorism, which he recently condemned.
In that connection, his criticism of the Soviet Union for its reckless and irresponsible encouragement of terrorist gangs is well founded. In the Middle East, the Soviet Union's support of the killers who call themselves the Palestine Liberation Organization is notorious. Other nations also support these terrorists, not least among them Saudi Arabia and Kuwait, which contribute hundreds of millions of dollars annually to the P.L.O.
Allan Lesser letter recommends cutting Federal funds from U S budget that finance foreign terrorist groups
However, it is regrettable that, next to the Soviet Union, the largest financial contributor to the P.L.O. - though indirectly - is the United States itself.
On the recommendation of the State Department, the Congress for the last five years or so has appropriated roughly $60 million to the United Nations Relief and Works Agency (UNRWA), which physically supports the P.L.O. This is definitely one program President Reagan can trim back to its original aim.
UNRWA was set up to assist the resettlement of Arab refugees of the 1948 Arab war against Israel. It has since become one of the most corrupting influences in the Middle East. Administration of its fortified concrete-block settlements - there have not been any tented ''camps'' in over 10 years - is entirely in the hands of the P.L.O., as are its schools, its hospitals and its personnel.
These settlements have become staging areas for P.L.O. raids against Israel as well as bases for the P.L.O. civil war in Lebanon.  The annual UNRWA report clearly reveals how completely subservient to the P.L.O. this agency has become. Moreover, the report also demonstrates the extent to which this agency has over the years become a vested interest in the life of the Arab states bordering Israel.
It has in fact developed into an Arab welfare agency where impoverished Arabs can receive free support, free education and free health services from birth to death at the expense largely of the American taxpayer. The number of non-refugee Arab poor and homeless who flock to the UNRWA settlements has increased dramatically, but the contribution to UNRWA of the oil-rich Arab states has been minimal, while the Soviet Union has never contributed any funds whatever.
The time is long past when the Congress should be closing the books on UNRWA. President Reagan can demonstrate very clearly that he means what he says if he recommends the end of this program and thereby eliminates a major source of support for P.L.O. terrorism.
ALLEN LESSER, Washington, Feb. 19, 1981


End of Document