U.S. military shifts maritime strategy; New tactic stresses preventing conflict as much as winning
Richmond Times Dispatch (Virginia)
October 18, 2007 Thursday
State Edition


Copyright 2007 Richmond Newspapers, Inc. All Rights Reserved
Section: GENERAL; Pg. A-16
Length: 337 words
Dateline: WASHINGTON 
Body


The U.S. military revealed a new maritime strategy yesterday - its first created jointly by the Navy, Marine Corps and Coast Guard. The strategy shifts from a narrow focus on sea combat toward one that also emphasizes the use of "soft power" to counter terrorism and deliver humanitarian assistance.
 The strategy, shaped by the Sept. 11, 2001, attacks and the wars that followed, stresses preventing conflict as much as winning wars, and recognizes that "no one nation" can secure the world's waters against terrorism and other threats.
 Adm. Gary Roughead, chief of naval operations; Gen. James Conway, Marine Corps commandant; and Adm. Thad Allen, Coast Guard commandant, presented the strategy - titled "A Cooperative Strategy for 21st Century Seapower" - to maritime leaders from more than 100 other countries attending the International Seapower Symposium at the Naval War College at Newport, Rhode Island.
 The new approach marks a stark departure from the last U.S. maritime strategy, conceived by the Navy in the 1980s, which focused heavily on offensive operations against the then-Soviet Union.
 "Soft power, the humanitarian and economic efforts, have been elevated to the same level as high-end naval warfare," said a senior Navy official, who spoke on condition of anonymity.
 The 16-page document was developed over two years and outlines six imperatives. These include the traditional missions of concentrating major combat forces in the Persian Gulf, Indian Ocean and Western Pacific to deter or fight potential conflicts.
 In addition, the strategy calls for dispersing smaller maritime teams to carry out humanitarian missions and to counter terrorism, weapons proliferation, piracy and other illicit maritime activities - partly in order to contain local threats before they can reach the United States.
 Still, some critics said the strategy does not go far enough toward creating a seamless U.S. maritime force able to coordinate closely with other nations to protect the United States and international waters.

Load-Date: October 23, 2007


End of Document