U.S. SEEMS TO BE TARGET OF NEW STRAIN OF TERROR
The New York Times
December 13, 1983, Tuesday, Late City Final Edition


Copyright 1983 The New York Times Company
Section: Section A; Page 18, Column 1; Foreign Desk
Length: 937 words
Byline: By PHILIP TAUBMAN
Dateline: WASHINGTON, Dec. 12
Body


Reagan Administration officials said today that this mornings's truck-bomb attack against the United States Embassy in Kuwait appeared to be linked to recent warnings of possible terrorist strikes against American installations here and aboard.
 Those warnings, which intelligence agencies began to report last month, led to increased security at the White House and the State Department.
The officials said that the attack in Kuwait seemed to be confirmation that the United States has become the leading target for a new strain of terrorism in the Middle East.
The attack, they said, was almost identical to terrorist strikes earlier this year against the American Embassy in Beirut and United States Marine headquarters in Lebanon.
US officials fear bombing of US Embassy in Kuwait, as well as recent attacks in Lebanon, indicate US is leading target for new strain of Mideast terrorism; speculate about coordination by certain Moslem groups and see need for new security measures against suicide attacks (S)'Some Kind of Threshold'
A truck bomb exploded outside the embassy in Beirut in April, killing 63 people, including 17 Americans. On Oct. 23, a Mercedes truck carrying explosives crashed into the Marine headquarters at Beirut International Airport, killing 240 American servicemen.
''Many of us,'' a senior intelligence official said, ''have the feeling that we have crossed some kind of threshold and have become the primary target for terrorists in the Middle East.''
In today's attack, officials said, a Mercedes truck packed with explosives crashed through the main gate of the American Embassy compound and detonated outside an embassy annex, destroying that building and causing extensive damage to other offices.
Intelligence officials said there appeared to be a pattern to the suicide attacks in the Middle East that suggests they are being coordinated by Moslem groups, but the officials said there was no hard evidence to support that theory.
Administration security officials said today that additional defenses against terrorist attacks, particularly truck bombs, might be needed at Government buildings.
 
Defenses Had Been Improved
State Department officials said that the Embassy in Kuwait increased security in recent months after receiving threats, but that the improved defenses were ineffective today against the fast- moving truck that smashed through an entrance gate and speeded past armed guards before it exploded 50 yards inside the American compound.
Alan D. Romberg, a State Department spokesman, said the embassy ''tried to take appropriate security precautions, especially in the aftermath of the recent bombings in Beirut.'' He declined to discuss specific security improvements.
He added, however, that ''embassies by their nature must be accessible to the public and cannot be made into armed fortresses.''
''This limits the type of protective measures that can be taken,'' he said.
The use of large, bomb-laden trucks represents a major change in terrorist tactics in the Middle East, intelligence officials said. If the attacks are coordinated and supported by government authorities, the officials said, the danger is even greater.
Reagan Administration officials have said there is some evidence to suggest that Iran and Syria are providing assistance to terrorist groups and may have helped plan the attacks in Lebanon earlier this year.
Last week, President Reagan told a group of political supporters that as many as 1,000 terrorists, many from Iran, were available in Lebanon to conduct suicide-bombing attacks.
Mr. Reagan, according to White House officials, said, ''We have information right now that they have marshaled a force, particularly of Iranians in Lebanon, that numbers up to 1,000 who are willing to sacrifice their lives in a kamikaze attack.''
 
A Different Phenomenon
A senior Administration official, referring to the suicide attacks, said, ''It's a different kind of phenomenon, because even in the height of the P.L.O.'s terrorist activities, they didn't really have people in one-way missions.''
The official added: ''This is very serious, and difficult to deal with. There's very little you can do, other than to try to have the best intelligence possible.''
Other Administration officials said the most ominous thing about the new terrorist tactics was that they appear to have been coordinated to some extent by foreign governments as an instrument of policy.
''It's very different from having terrorist groups operating on their own,'' one intelligence official said. ''When you link terrorism to the resources of a government, the possibilities are frightening.''
Intelligence reports received several days before Thanksgiving warned that a pro-Iranian Shiite Moslem group in Lebanon, called the Islamic Amal, appeared to be preparing for terrorist attacks against United States installations in the Middle East and possibly Washington, intelligence officials said.
Administration officials have accused the group of involvement in the attacks against the American Embassy and the Marines in Beirut.
When the reports were received, entrances to the White House were blocked by dump trucks loaded with sand, and driveways leading to the State Department garage were filled with cars and trucks. Permanent cement barriers were later installed outside some White House entrances.
Administration officials confirmed today that the White House is protected by surface-to-air missiles capable of shooting down suspicious aircraft flying toward the Executive Mansion, but they refused to say whether the air- defense system was recently installed or has been in place for some time.


End of Document