U.S. must deal with a new facet of terrorism Individuals, smaller groups committing violent acts
USA TODAY
August 4, 1999, Wednesday,
FINAL EDITION


Copyright 1999 Gannett Company, Inc.
Section: NEWS;
Length: 896 words
Byline: Barbara Slavin
Dateline: WASHINGTON
Body


WASHINGTON -- When terrorists blew up two U.S. embassies in Africa
a year ago, they grimly illustrated a trend: Acts of terror by
governments are declining, while devastation by individuals and
independent groups is on the rise.
"We're having to graduate from our old thinking about state-sponsored
terrorism to terrorism's new look," says Rep. Porter Goss, R-Fla.,
chairman of the House Intelligence Committee. "We're facing increasingly
cause-sponsored terrorism," such as the embassy bombings blamed
on Saudi-born Islamic extremist Osama bin Laden and crimes committed
by "solo wackos" such as convicted Unabomber Ted Kaczynski and
Oklahoma City bomber Timothy McVeigh, Goss says.
McVeigh's act -- blowing up the Alfred P. Murrah Federal Building
in 1995 and killing 168 people -- was the deadliest single terrorist
act committed in the United States.
The worst act of international terrorism, according to the State
Department, was the 1985 bombing of an Air India jet by Sikh terrorists.
It blew up over the Atlantic, killing 329 people.
The bombing of the U.S. Embassy in Nairobi, Kenya, last Aug. 7
was a close second, with 291 fatalities, 12 of them Americans.
Another 10 people died the same day in a similar blast at the
U.S. Embassy in Dar es Salaam, Tanzania.
Although last year's casualties were high because of the bombings
in Africa, the number of terrorist incidents abroad, 273, was
the lowest since 1971. State Department officials say fewer than
15 were committed by groups with government backing. That compares
with 1987, the peak year for international terrorism, when 189
of 666 attacks had some state sponsorship.
Of seven countries listed by the State Department as terrorist
sponsors, four -- Libya, North Korea, Syria and Cuba -- had no
record of direct involvement in international terrorism for a
decade. The other three -- Iran, Sudan and Iraq -- also have cut
back on terror abroad, although they still finance and shelter
terrorist groups, the latest State Department report on terrorism
says.
This year, Libya finally turned over two suspects in the 1988
bombing of Pan Am Flight 103, which killed 270 people. Syria expelled
the Kurdish guerrilla leader Ab-dullah Ocalan and is likely to
curb radical Palestinian groups in Damascus.
The reasons for this improving behavior are not altruistic. Faced
with U.S. and U.N. sanctions and the loss of trade, tourism and
investment, "these countries are realizing that the losses outweigh
the gains," says Kenneth Katzman, a Mideast expert with the Congressional
Research Service.
But as older forms of terrorism decline, new ones arise that can
be harder to deter or punish. U.S. government and independent
analysts say bin Laden has several thousand followers in countries
from Africa to Latin America who support his opposition to the
U.S. presence in the Arab world.
Using funds from an inheritance of more than a quarter-billion
dollars and from front businesses, the son of a Saudi contractor
has gathered adherents from other violent Islamic groups and Pakistanis
fighting in the disputed province of Kashmir. Stripped of his
citizenship by Saudi Arabia and expelled by Sudan, bin Laden moved
to Afghanistan in 1996. There he has established a symbiotic relationship
with the Taliban, an extremist faction that is in control of more
than two-thirds of the country.
Analysts say it's hard to say who sponsors whom. Bin Laden has
supplied both money and Arab fighters for the Taliban. "If anything,
bin Laden is a donor to the Taliban," Katzman says. "He's becoming
almost a state within a state."
The State Department has offered a $ 5 million reward for information
leading to bin Laden's capture, and it has forbidden U.S. economic
ties with the Taliban.
Concerned about bin Laden's global reach, the FBI, which has put
him on its 10 Most Wanted list, recently canceled public tours
of its headquarters in Washington. A half-dozen U.S. embassies
in Africa have been closed at various times this summer, also
because of threats from bin Laden followers. Katzman worries about
possible targets in New York. He says bin Laden has "absorbed
the network" of Sheik Omar Abdel-Rahman, an Egyptian blamed for
the 1993 bombing of the World Trade Center, which killed six and
injured 1,000.
Others caution against inflating bin Laden's role, saying it only
makes him more attractive to those with a grudge against the United
States. "Bin Laden is not a field marshal directing all activities,"
says Bruce Hoffman, a terrorism expert at the Rand Corp. "You're
talking about a constellation of forces and individuals that can
come together to put on a particular act."
Most worrisome are terrorists' increasing technological prowess
and ability to finance themselves. With as much as $ 3 million
in annual income from legitimate as well as illegal businesses,
"these groups don't need countries for financial support and
less and less for havens," Hoffman says. New computer and communication
technology and links with organized crime make terrorism even
more difficult to combat.
Goss says terrorism always will be "a weapon of choice among
unstable people and those with a strong ax to grind against the
United States." He worries that the United States is unprepared,
particularly for biological terrorism, in which deadly viruses
could be released in highly populated areas: "All the best intelligence,
preparation and law enforcement in the world will not be enough
to stop all the crazies."

Graphic

 
GRAPHIC, B/W, Genevieve Lynn, USA TODAY, Source: Patterns of Global Terrorism, 1998, U.S. State Department (Line graph); PHOTO, B/W, Saeed Khan, AFP; Anti-U.S. feelings: A religious protester holds a portrait of Saudi dissident Osama bin Laden during a demonstration against the United States last week in Islamabad, Pakistan.

Load-Date: August 4, 1999


End of Document