U.S. attorney advises calmness on terrorism;
Patrick Meehan said an alert was no cause
for panic. Still, he asked residents to be vigilant.<
 The Philadelphia Inquirer
NOVEMBER 8, 2001 Thursday CITY-D EDITION


Copyright 2001 Philadelphia Newspapers, LLC  All Rights Reserved


Section: PHILADELPHIA; Pg. B03
Length: 325 words
Byline: Marc Schogol INQUIRER STAFF WRITER
Dateline: VILLANOVA
Body


There are no new terrorist alerts in effect, but people shouldn't panic when one is issued, such as the recent warning about bridges and other possible targets that turned out to be a false alarm, U.S. Attorney Patrick Meehan said yesterday.
Meehan said that when the government receives intelligence about "credible threats," it will make that information public because officials would rather "err on the side of disclosure."
While calling for calm, Meehan urged people to be vigilant about anything suspiciously out of the ordinary in their communities.
Meehan, the U.S. attorney for the Eastern District of Pennsylvania, said that when specific alerts are lifted: "I don't want to create the impression that it's like turning on a light - everything is back to normal."
Henceforth, he said, "this is going to be part of the routine adjustment - what we do in society."
Meehan's remarks followed a meeting of his Anti-Terrorism Task Force held at Villanova University.
There, experts gave a lesson on terrorists' modus operandi to about 500 local, state and federal law enforcement officials from the region.
The class covered how terrorist organizations worldwide are trained and operate; the surveillance and other tactics employed by terrorist cells; how a terrorist cell is formed and how it could operate in communities in this area; and how law enforcement officials could and should analyze "people, places and things most likely to be subject to attack in their community so a plan can be developed to safeguard all our communities."
Participants in the class said it was a valuable lesson.
"We were sensitized what to look for," said Mike Johnson, supervisor of the FBI's Fort Washington office.
Included was the fact that terrorists can be homegrown. Meehan said authorities were investigating possible terrorism - including the recent cases of anthrax - by domestic as well as foreign groups.
Marc Schogol's e-mail address is mschogol@phillynews.com.  

Load-Date: November 15, 2001


End of Document