U.S. IS PRESSING ASSAD ON ABU NIDAL
The New York Times
May 20, 1986, Tuesday, Late City Final Edition


Copyright 1986 The New York Times Company
Section: Section A; Page 3, Column 1; Foreign Desk
Length: 904 words
Byline: By BERNARD GWERTZMAN, Special to the New York Times
Dateline: WASHINGTON, May 19
Body


The United States urged President Hafez al-Assad of Syria today to close the Damascus office of what it says is a terrorist organization led by Abu Nidal.
Reagan Administration officials said this act by Mr. Assad would demonstrate that his avowed opposition to terrorism was genuine, At the same time, a senior White House official expressed frustration at Mr. Assad's inability to show results in the effort to free American hostages still believed held by pro-Iranian Lebanese in the Bekaa valley of Lebanon controlled by Syrian troops.
''We have deliberately shown restraint in our comments about Syria because of promises from Assad that he is doing his best to get the hostages out,'' the official said. ''But so far, he has not produced anything.''
Syrian officials have told the United States that they do not have leverage over those holding the Americans and that any effort to free them by force may jeopardize the lives of the Americans. More recently, the Syrians said the American bombing raid on Libya had made the freeing of the hostages impossible for the moment.
 
Syrian-Israeli War Doubted
Despite the continuing problems with Syria over terrorism and the hostages, the United States reiterated that it saw no likelihood of war between Israel and Syria at this time.
Administration officials said the request to Mr. Assad personally to evict the Abu Nidal group had been conveyed in a private diplomatic message. It was underscored in a public statement today by Larry Speakes, the White House spokesman, who said:
''As long as terrorists move freely within Syria and within Syrian-controlled territory in Lebanon, our serious concern remains for Syria's support for international terrorism. For example, we believe Syria should rid itself of Abu Nidal and his organization.''
State Department officials said the United States believes that the Palestinian splinter group led by Abu Nidal, the nom de guerre of Sabry al-Banna, conducts its main operations from Libya. The group is believed to have a small office, two blocks from the United States Embassy in Damascus. Mr. Assad has said that he does not countenance international terrorism and that the Abu Nidal group is not engaged in such activity from Syrian soil.
 
Syria Stays on Terrorist List
In talks with American officials in Damascus, the Syrians have said that, as a matter of principle, they cannot close a Palestinian group's office.
Some Administration officials say that until it is closed, Syria will remain with Iran, South Yemen, Libya, and Cuba on the list of nations that the United States views as supporting terrorist groups. The American officials said the refusal to close the Abu Nidal office belied Syria's avowed opposition to terrorism.
Nevertheless, the United States said, the tensions of the last two weeks over the possibiity of a Syrian-Israeli war seem to have dissipated. Bernard Kalb, the State Department spokesman, said, ''We don't see any indications that would lead to hostilities.''
Over the weeked Prime Minister Shimon Peres of Israel and President Assad, in separate interviews, also said that they did not believe warfare was likely to occur.
Mr. Kalb said: ''We believe these statements are genuine. We welcome their effect on reducing tensions in the region.''
 
Shultz Plans a Mideast Trip
In a related development, officials said Secretary of State George P. Shultz was considering a trip to the Middle East if Israel and Egypt could work out an agreement on submitting a dispute over the Taba border area to arbitration. The State Department's legal adviser, Abraham Sofaer, is in Israel as a mediator. It is possible that Mr. Shultz may use such a trip to try and provide momentum to the stalled Middle East peace effort, officials said.
The United States has been seeking the release of American hostages in Lebanon through Syrian good offices for more than a year. But there has been no breakthrough, and some officials have said that they doubt Syria is making a determined enough effort.
The recent flurry over the possibility of an Israeli-Syrian war was caused in part by disclosures made by Defense Minister Yitzhak Rabin of Israel, who was here two weeks ago. He discussed the Syrian construction of defensive fortifications in Lebanon and said Britain had evidence linking the attempt to put a bomb aboard an El Al airliner in London to the Syrian Embassy.
 
U.S. Wary on El Al Link
The United States has been wary of drawing conclusions because of doubts by intelligence officers that Mr. Assad countenanced such an action. One official said it was ''out of character'' for Mr. Assad to go along with the bombing of a civilian plane, but he said that ''perhaps he has taken a new tack.''
In an interview with The Washington Post that was printed on Sunday, Mr. Assad denied any ties to terrorism.
The Abu Nidal group, which has had several different names, originally was based in Iraq after its founding in 1974, but it was evicted in the early 1980's, moving its operations to Syria and Libya. It is said to have a few hundred members and to rely on help from others in particular operations.
It was accused by the United States of being responsible for the attacks on the Rome and Vienna airports last December. This touched off the economic boycott of Libya for its reported role in providing support to the Abu Nidal group.
Administration officials said today that they did not know where Abu Nidal himself was living.


End of Document