U.S., Islam not in conflict, Clinton says Tells U.N. that only foe is terrorism
USA TODAY
September 22, 1998, Tuesday,
FINAL EDITION


Copyright 1998 Gannett Company, Inc.
Section: NEWS;
Length: 403 words
Byline: Barbara Slavin
Body


President Clinton made an overture Monday toward Muslim nations,
saying that terrorism was a global problem and those who view
a clash between the West and Islam as inevitable are "terribly
wrong."
"False prophets may use and abuse any religion to justify whatever
political objectives they have -- even cold-blooded murder,"
Clinton told the U.N. General Assembly. "But that is not our
understanding of Islam."
Coming a month after bombings at two U.S. embassies in Africa,
which killed more than 250 people and injured 5,500, and the retaliatory
U.S. missile strikes in Afghanistan and Sudan, Clinton's speech
was seen as a gesture to the wider Muslim world.
Since the collapse of the Soviet Union in 1991, some political
scientists have theorized that the next major geopolitical fault
line will be between Muslim and Judeo-Christian societies.
But Clinton, noting that a quarter of the world's population --
including 6 million Americans -- are Muslim, said the only dividing
line was between those who support or practice terror and those
who regard it as murder.
Clinton noted that there are 1,200 mosques and Islamic centers
in the USA.
"The 6 million Muslims who worship there will tell you there
is no inherent clash between Islam and America," Clinton said.
Zalmay Khalilzad of the Rand think tank in Washington called the
president's comments at the United Nations "a good idea" after
the anti-Muslim anger generated in the USA by the embassy bombs,
which U.S. officials blamed on Saudi financier Saudi Osama bin
Laden. U.S. retaliation for the attacks, in turn, produced widespread
Muslim anger.
In recent years, Khalilzad said, there has been a U.S. tendency
to replace talk of a communist threat with that of a Muslim one.
U.S. policy on issues from terrorism to weapons proliferation
have focused on Muslim nations.
Clinton, however, said all nations are victimized by terrorism,
including Iran. He cited attacks around the world, from Ireland
to the former Yugoslavia to Japan.
Khalilzad said the president's speech also appeared to be directed
at Iranian President Mohammed Khatami, who spoke after Clinton.
The Iranian leader also condemned terrorism and called for U.N.-sponsored
talks to resolve a long-standing conflict among Muslim rivals
in Afghanistan.
Nine Iranians were killed there last month by the dominant Afghan
faction, but Khatami said Iran, which has massed nearly 300,000
troops on the border, preferred a diplomatic solution.

Graphic

 
PHOTO, B/W, Don Emmert, AFP

Load-Date: September 22, 1998


End of Document