U.S. ASKS ALLIES TO FIGHT TERRORISM < EUROPEANS AND ARABS WERE URGED TO ACT IN THE MIDEAST.< MILITANTS WOULD BE DENIED SANCTUARY.
 The Philadelphia Inquirer
MARCH 30, 1996 Saturday D EDITION


Copyright 1996 Philadelphia Newspapers, LLC  All Rights Reserved


Section: NATIONAL; Pg. A03
Length: 514 words
Byline: FROM INQUIRER WIRE SERVICES
Dateline: WASHINGTON
Body


The Clinton administration appealed to European allies and two friendly Arab governments yesterday to clamp down on terrorists whose suicide bombings in Israel have stalled Middle East peacemaking.
The appeal aims to deny sanctuary, funds and mobility to militant groups whose attacks have caused Israelis to question pursuing land-for-peace deals with Syria and the Palestine Liberation Organization, and entrusting Gaza and West Bank security to Palestinian police.
Diplomats and counterterrorism experts from 27 countries, the European Community and the Palestinian Authority met at the State Department for two days to discuss how to thwart murderous infiltrators and to help financially Palestinians kept from their jobs by Israel's sealed borders.
They recommended facilitating the sharing of information about terrorist groups, using extradition treaties more effectively to punish terrorists, tightening border controls, and eliminating terrorists' sources of money, U.S. officials reported at a briefing that shielded their identities.
Foreign ministers are expected to act on the recommendations at a follow-up conference April 22 in Luxembourg. Secretary of State Warren Christopher plans to attend after a trip to Moscow with President Clinton for talks with Russian President Boris N. Yeltsin.
Nicholas Burns, the State Department spokesman, urged Syria on Thursday to drop its boycott of the series of counterterrorism conferences. The first was held at Clinton's initiative this month in Sharm el-Sheikh, Egypt, to condemn four suicide bombings in Israel that killed 62 people and wounded dozens.
Burns also urged Jordan and Saudi Arabia to take action against militant groups. State Department reports say a variety of Palestinian rejectionist groups, including Hamas, which claimed the attacks in Israel, have offices in Jordan.
"All countries have an obligation to end direct or indirect support," Burns said.
In Jerusalem, Israel welcomed a U.S.-backed plan to pump money and jobs into the West Bank and Gaza Strip, but Palestinians said it was not enough to alleviate their suffering from an Israeli closure.
"We are very interested in helping the Palestinians find jobs in Gaza and the West Bank. We are very sensitive to the problems caused by the closure," Israeli government spokesman Uri Dromi said.
"We hope that together with the United States and European countries, funds will be found to help create alternative jobs for the Palestinians," he added.
Secretary of State Christopher announced the emergency plan at the antiterrorism conference Thursday. The plan shifted gears both on the focus of the conference and U.S. strategy for dealing with terrorism and the anxiety the four suicide bombings have caused the Israeli people.
"We must find ways to support the Palestinian people as they, too, suffer the consequences of the Hamas bombings," Christopher said.
Israel sealed off its border with the West Bank and Gaza Strip last month after the first two suicide bombings. The closure cut off more than 60,000 Palestinians from jobs and restricted Palestinian trade.

Load-Date: October 28, 2002


End of Document