U.S. VOICES 'SERIOUS CONCERN' OVER PLO CLASH
St. Louis Post-Dispatch (Missouri)
February 9, 1989, THURSDAY, FIVE STAR Edition


Copyright 1989 St. Louis Post-Dispatch, Inc.
Section: NEWS; Pg. 14A
Length: 294 words
Body


WASHINGTON (AP) - The United States has formally notified the Palestine Liberation Organization of its ''serious concern'' over the PLO's clash with Israelis in southern Lebanon, the State Department announced Wednesday.  Robert Pelletreau, the U.S. ambassador to Tunisia, registered the United States' view at a meeting with Hakam Balloui, a PLO representative, said department spokesman Charles E. Redman.
Israel has charged that five guerrillas from the PLO were attempting to infiltrate when they were intercepted and slain Saturday in a security zone Israel has set up across its border in southern Lebanon.  Accusing the PLO of terrorism, the Israeli government said the United States should break off the dialogue it began three months ago with the PLO.  That dialogue was based on a renunciation of terrorism by Chairman Yasser Arafat.  Meanwhile, Israeli Ambassador Moshe Arad called on Secretary of State James A. Baker III. Later, he said, ''We feel this whole dialogue was not warranted by the realities and by the behavior of the PLO, and we keep to the same position and the same view.'' Also on Wednesday, four Arabs were killed by army gunfire and a Jewish settler was burned to death when Palestinians threw a firebomb at his car in the occupied West Bank.  Military sources said the Israeli perished after his car was set ablaze by Palestinians near the settlement of Alfe Menashe.  Military police killed an Arab prisoner and wounded at least 19 in a jailhouse riot at Megiddo, in northern Israel. The riot was sparked by the prison authorities' decision to cancel family visits.  In the West Bank, soldiers killed two Palestinian teen-agers, and an Arab from Gaza who was shot in clashes with the army Tuesday died of his wounds in an Israeli clinic.

Load-Date: October 23, 1993


End of Document