U.S. WILL SPEND MILLIONS TRAINING INDONESIAN POLICE TO FIGHT TERRORISM;
 OFFICIALS SEEK TO BOOST EFFORTS WITHOUT EXCEEDING LIMITS
St. Louis Post-Dispatch (Missouri)
July 31, 2002 Wednesday Three Star Edition


Copyright 2002 St. Louis Post-Dispatch, Inc.
Section: NEWS ; Pg. A10
Length: 418 words
Byline: The Associated Press
Dateline: BANDAR SERI BEGAWAN, BRUNEI
Body


The Bush administration, eager to help Indonesia confront daunting anti-terrorism challenges, is pushing to achieve that goal without violating congressional limitations on U.S. military assistance to that country.
The administration expects to provide $16 million for counterterrorism training of Indonesian police officers, which is normally designed for military personnel, said a senior State Department official accompanying Secretary of State Colin Powell on an Asian tour.
It also plans to spend $400,000 during the current fiscal year and next year to train civilians in anti-terrorism activities. Indonesians are also expected to be major participants in a $17 million Pentagon-administered program for what are known as "counterterrorism fellowships," the official said.
U.S. legislation bars normalization of military ties between the two countries until the army demonstrates a commitment to greater civilian control and accountability. The curbs were imposed by the Congress in 1999 after the Indonesian military committed savage abuses against East Timorese.
Powell is on a six-country tour of Southeast Asian countries and is being joined here by colleagues from more than 20 countries.
He and representatives of the 10-nation Association of Southeast Asian Nations are expected to sign an agreement Thursday to reinforce their counterterrorism cooperation.
Also, North Korean Foreign Minister Paek Nam-sun departed Pyongyang on Tuesday for Brunei. There have been strong hints that Paek will seek a meeting with Powell in the next day or two, but neither side has made an announcement.
North Korea has indicated a willingness to accept a proposal by President George W. Bush to reopen talks on security issues. There have been no such discussions since late in the Clinton administration.
On Indonesia, some analysts question the political will of President Megawati Sukarnoputri to challenge Islamic militant groups. But Powell sounded cautiously optimistic when, with Singapore Prime Minister Goh Chok Tong at his side Tuesday in Singapore, he discussed the issue at a late afternoon news conference.
"I think (the Indonesians) recognize the dangers that we all face," he said. "I think that they have been cooperating more fully with us as time goes by, and I'm quite sure that Mrs. Megawati is committed to this cause."
He said he and Goh spent considerable time discussing the issue during their meeting.
Because the police are relatively weak, he said, the support of the military is indispensable.

Notes

WORLD FOCUS

Graphic

 
PHOTO; Photo from THE ASSOCIATED PRESS - Indonesian police officers salute during a show of force on the grounds of the Parliament complex in Jakarta on Tuesday. Security forces are gearing up for protests expected as leaders convene a legislative session on Thursday.

Load-Date: August 1, 2002


End of Document