U.S. attorney heads area's anti-terrorism task force
Spokesman Review (Spokane, WA)
September 20, 2001 Thursday Spokane Edition


Copyright 2001 Spokane Spokesman-Review
Section: MAIN NEWS; Pg.A3
Length: 362 words
Byline: Mike Roarke Staff writer
Body


Assistant U.S. Attorney Tom Rice will coordinate the Spokane region's new
 Anti-Terrorism Task Force - one of dozens of such task forces being
 established in response to last week's attacks.
 Attorney General John Ashcroft has directed each U.S. attorney district to
 form a task force that will be made up of federal, state and local
 authorities.
 Each regional group will pass information about suspected terrorist
 networks between federal and local police agencies.
On Wednesday, Rice said he could not discuss particulars of the group,
 which will coordinate efforts in Eastern Washington. Federal agencies involved
 in the task force include the FBI, Border Patrol, Immigration and
 Naturalization Service, and Bureau of Alcohol, Tobacco and Firearms.
 Three years ago, the FBI formed a domestic terrorism task force in Eastern
 Washington, North Idaho and Montana.
 In a prepared statement, Ashcroft said: ''I have directed every United
 States attorney to commit all available resources and manpower to our national
 mission against terrorism. This system will provide law enforcement with a
 comprehensive and seamless approach to attack terrorism within our borders."
 At least 4,000 FBI agents nationwide have been assigned to follow tips
 about the attacks.
 Authorities have identified some 200 key people who are being sought for
 questioning around the country. An FBI list, obtained by the Los Angeles
 Times, according to the newspaper, shows one of the men lives in Spokane.
 FBI Special Agent Egon Dezihan said he was not able to discuss what leads
 Spokane agents are pursuing.
 This week, agents were in Pullman to interview a man. The FBI also took
 records from a company that manages a North Spokane apartment complex.
 A person familiar with the situation said a community college student with
 a Saudi Arabian passport had moved out of his apartment on the first of this
 month. He left behind aircraft manuals that had descriptions of cockpit
 instruments for large, commercial airplanes.
 Both Spokane Falls Community College and Spokane Community College offer
 classes in aviation studies.
 The person said the man left a forwarding address in Colorado, under a
 different name.

Load-Date: September 21, 2001


End of Document