U.S. ABLE TO COMBAT NUCLEAR BLACKMAIL
The New York Times
June 11, 1981, Thursday, Late City Final Edition


Copyright 1981 The New York Times Company
Section: Section A; Page 7, Column 1; Foreign Desk
Length: 584 words
Byline: By CHARLES MOHR, Special to the New York Times
Dateline: WASHINGTON, June 10
Body


Government officials said today that they had achieved a sophisticated technological ability to detect, in most cases, whether a terrorist blackmail threat involving nuclear materials was genuine or a bluff.
But the officials also acknowledged to the Senate Foreign Relations Committee that it was impossible to provide absolute security against such an incident in the future.
Richard T. Kennedy, the Under Secretary of State for Management, also told the Senate committee that the Soviet Union was ''deeply engaged in support of revolutionary violence'' aimed at weakening and ''destabilizing'' other nations. But he added that Moscow apparently had tried to avoid direct involvement in terrorist incidents and had attempted to channel support to terrorist groups through Soviet ''surrogates.''
Government officials tell Senate Foreign Relations Committee of a technology to determine if nuclear terrorist attempts are genuine
Mr. Kennedy's testimony was consistent with earlier statements by Secretary of State Alexander M. Haig Jr. and other officials. Reagan Administration officials have been more vocal than those of the Carter Administration in condemning the Soviet Union for ''support'' of international terrorism, but have avoided suggesting that Moscow ''controls'' or ''directs'' it.
 
Detection Ability 'Very Good'
Senator John H. Glenn, Democrat of Ohio, asked about the ability to detect whether any group that might threaten to explode a nuclear device - or otherwise use nuclear material in a terrorist blackmail plan - actually possessed dangerous nuclear materials.
''The capability is very good,'' Mr. Kennedy, a former member of the Nuclear Regulatory Commission, replied. He said that ''there is a fairly clear ability to determine the location and actual condition'' of any nuclear material that might be smuggled into or assembled by a terrorist group in this country.
Mr. Kennedy said that it would be ''possible to survey if fissionable material is really present'' in a hypothetical case in which a terrorist group threatened to act in an American city.
Martin Dowd, director of security for the Department of Energy, said that special teams in the Energy Department, trained to work with the Federal Bureau of Investigation, had in the last six years developed what he called a ''very sophisticated capability'' to determine whether a group was bluffing or might actually have a nuclear device. Other sources said later that radiation monitoring equipment was involved in these techniques.
 
Accuracy Put at 85 Percent
Mr. Dowd estimated that in 85 percent or more of possible cases of nuclear blackmail it would be scientifically feasible to detect a bluff.
He said that there had been about 75 ''extortion threats'' in the last five years. None of these involved a nuclear explosive device and all but one or two, other sources said, proved to involve no actual nuclear material.
Senator Glenn speculated about the relative simplicity of smuggling plutonium oxide into the country and of introducing it into the ''ventilating system of the Pentagon.''
Because of the threat of lung cancer posed by the substance, such an act would render the Pentagon building useless for ''some considerable time,'' Mr. Kennedy acknowledged. He said that the halflife of plutonium oxide, a standard of measuring disintegration, was at least 2,000 years, but argued that decontamination might be feasible. Both Mr. Kennedy and Mr. Dowd said that there could be no guaranteed security against nuclear terrorism.


End of Document