U.S. LEADS NATIONS TO SUMMIT OF PEACEMAKERS; MEETING IN EGYPT IS RESPONSE TO TERRORISM IN MIDDLE EAST
St. Louis Post-Dispatch (Missouri)
March 9, 1996, Saturday, FIVE STAR LIFT Edition


Copyright 1996 St. Louis Post-Dispatch, Inc.
Section: NEWS; Pg. 1A
Length: 789 words
Dateline: WASHINGTON
Body


In a dramatic stand against Middle East terrorism, world leaders swiftly accepted invitations Friday to a U.S.-sponsored conference in Egypt that President Bill Clinton proclaimed a "summit of the peacemakers."
Russian President Boris Yeltsin, German Chancellor Helmut Kohl, French President Jacques Chirac and Canadian Prime Minister Jean Chretien were among 25 to 30 government leaders expected to join Clinton, Israeli Prime Minister Shimon Peres and Palestinian President Yasser Arafat at the summit meeting Wednesday.
In the West Bank on Friday, Israeli soldiers blew up the home of the family of a Palestinian suicide bomber. Israeli troops had sealed the home Tuesday, one day after the fourth in a wave of fatal terrorist bombings of Israeli targets that has killed 61 people since Feb. 25.
The summit meeting, in the scuba-diving resort of Sharm el-Sheik, was called to demonstrate support from Europe and the Arabs for Israel.
It also was intended to take the initiative from Islamic terrorists, who have jeopardized the peace process, and give it back to peacemakers.
The conference will "send a dramatic and powerful signal of opposition" to the Muslim resistance movement Hamas, which took responsibility for the Israeli bombings, said Nicholas Burns, the State Department spokesman.
After the conference, Clinton will travel to Jerusalem in a personal show of solidarity with Israel. He is expected to deliver an address in Jerusalem and visit the grave of assassinated Israeli Prime Minister Yitzhak Rabin before returning to Washington Thursday.
Israeli Foreign Minister Ehud Barak said the United States and Israel would sign an agreement at the summit meeting on cooperating against terrorism.
The Middle East peace process is especially important to Clinton, who has made it a showcase of his foreign policy. White House officials believe that Clinton's involvement bestows the mantle of statesman and peacemaker for the coming presidential campaign.
Moreover, the United States wants to give a boost to Peres, the architect of Israel's peace policies, whose Labor government is battling to hold power in elections May 29.
The leaders of Russia, France, Germany, Italy, Spain and Canada said they would attend the session, along with Peres and representatives of some Persian Gulf and North African countries. Egyptian President Hosni Mubarak will be the host and, with Clinton, its co-sponsor.
"We expect that it will be a day of reaffirmation, both for the peace process and for the need to do everything governments can do in the international community to combat outlandish terrorism," said Mike McCurry, the White House press secretary.
McCurry said the message to Hamas is, "They should know they are now isolated in the international community."
The conference puts Syria and several other states still at odds with Israel on the spot. If they fail to attend, they distance themselves from an international denunciation of terrorism. If they attend, they will have to record their positions, and that makes some of them uncomfortable.
At the State Department, Burns said that the conference would look for "tangible and practical steps" to counter terrorism but that he did not know whether specific measures would be approved.
House Blown Up
In the West Bank village of Burka on Friday, Israel blew up the house of the family of a Palestinian suicide bomber for the first time since the latest rash of bombings and warned that it would return its army to the self-rule areas unless Arafat wipes out the radicals.
The warning from Foreign Minister Barak - a former military chief of staff - was the government's strongest yet in response to the bombings.
"There is not a lot of time, and activity is necessary," Barak said. "We won't say more than that, but it is clear to Arafat that if he does not do what is needed, we will - and soon."
Arafat must "prevent the next operation . . . and disarm those who are responsible for previous attacks," Barak said.
Israeli soldiers moved into Burka, near Nablus, and used 44 pounds of TNT to blast apart the two-room house of Raed Shaghnoubi, who carried the bomb that blew up Bus No. 18 in Jerusalem on March 3, killing himself and 18 other people.
Smoke and dust billowed into the air when the soldiers detonated dynamite charges they had laid around the stone, one-story house. The owner wailed as it was reduced to rubble.
Restrained by neighbors, she yelled at the soldiers, "You deserve what happens to you."
Soldiers told Israeli television that they could just as well have used a bulldozer to level the house, as was the past practice but that they wanted to stage a dramatic response to the bus bombings.
Burka was put under Israeli army curfew until further notice, the army said.

Graphic

 
PHOTO; (1) Color photo by AP - LEFT: The roof of the house of a Palestinian bomber is visible above billowing smoke after Israelis blew it up Friday. (2) Color photo by AP - ABOVE: A neighbor tries to console an unidentified member of the household after the building was demolished.

Load-Date: March 9, 1996


End of Document