U.S. GETS ISRAELI HARD LINE;
NETANYAHU LINKS FURTHER PEACE TALKS TO TERRORISM, SECURITY ISSUES
Pittsburgh Post-Gazette (Pennsylvania)
July 10, 1996, Wednesday,
SOONER EDITION


Copyright 1996 P.G. Publishing Co.
Section: WORLD,
Length: 672 words
Byline: TERENCE HUNT, THE ASSOCIATED PRESS
Dateline: WASHINGTON
Body


Taking an unyielding stance, Israeli Prime Minister Benjamin Netanyahu told President Clinton yesterday he would give no ground in Middle East peacemaking unless terrorism is halted and Israel's security is bolstered.
''Those who are on the side of peace must show complete dedication to the fight against terrorism,'' Netanyahu said after 2 1/2 hours of talks with Clinton. ''Anything less will simply not do. Israel is eager to make peace but we cannot do so alone.''
Netanyahu made clear that he was not ready to meet with Palestinian leader Yasser Arafat. He showed no interest in pursuing the ''land for peace'' maxim that has guided Middle East peacemaking. And he would not commit to withdrawing Israeli troops from Hebron, where 450 Israelis live among 94,000 Arabs.
''I'm looking into the problem,'' he said.
On another sensitive point, Netanyahu refused to lift restrictions that have prevented thousands of Palestinians in the West Bank and Gaza Strip from working in Israel.
''As soon as I deem the security conditions will allow it, I will ease the closure,'' Netanyahu said at a joint news conference with Clinton.
On Syria, Netanyahu said he would reopen negotiations only if Damascus stopped supporting terrorists.
For his part, Clinton declared that no alternative to the peace process existed, saying, ''We need to keep the tide of history going.''
Yet, recognizing the sea change in the Middle East after Netanyahu's May 29 election, Clinton said, ''I think we're going to have, necessarily, a period of adjustment, and those of us who care about it need to try to minimize the negative and maximize the positive and get through it as well as possible.''
The trip to Washington was Netanyahu's first visit abroad as prime minister and was viewed as crucial in setting the tone for relations between Clinton and the new prime minister.
Despite Netanyahu's generally tough words in pubic, he privately assured Clinton that he wanted to move ahead in negotiations with Palestinians and find a formula soon for a Hebron solution, a senior U.S. official said.
Peacemaking in the Middle East and in other global hot spots has been a cornerstone of Clinton's foreign policy and a central theme in his re-election campaign. Clinton - as well as Arab leaders - worries that Netanyahu's hard-line views put a cloud over peacemaking efforts.
Netanyahu's tough stance was the chief reason that Clinton had supported his rival, then Prime Minister Shimon Peres.
There was a clear disagreement on the issue of the land-for-peace principle.
Netanyahu stressed that Israel should make territorial concessions only for secure borders. But White House spokesman Mike McCurry said, ''Our views on land-for-peace remain unchanged, and the president conveyed that to the prime minister today.''
News reports from Israel had suggested that Netanyahu would tell Clinton he planned to meet with Arafat. However, the prime minister said merely he wouldn't rule out the possibility of a one-on-one session ''if I deem it necessary for peace or for the interest of Israel.''
He said Arafat's Palestinian Authority has not fulfilled its agreements with Israel to close its offices in Jerusalem or to crack down harder on terrorists.
Netanyahu said he was prepared to negotiate peace with Syrian President Hafez Assad, but he added, ''I can tell you that the first item on my agenda would be the cessation of all terrorist attacks from Syrian-controlled areas in Lebanon, via Hezbollah, or, for that matter, other terrorist attacks from groups based in Syria. And I think it's only right.''
Clinton said that despite some disagreements with Netanyahu, the U.S. commitment to Israel and its security ''remains rock solid. Those who try to drive a wedge between Israel and the United States will not succeed.''
 
Clinton announced the United States would share missile-defense technology with Israel to give it immediate notice of any missile launches in the Middle East. He also said U.S. and Israeli delegates would meet this month to plot counterterrorism strategy.

Load-Date: July 11, 1996


End of Document