U.S. LINKS TEHERAN TO TERROR SQUADS
The New York Times
November 12, 1989, Sunday, Late Edition - Final


Copyright 1989 The New York Times Company
Section: Section 1; Part 1, Page 15, Column 1; Foreign Desk
Length: 900 words
Byline: By STEPHEN ENGELBERG, Special to The New York Times
Dateline: WASHINGTON, Nov. 11
Body


Every few weeks, a heavily laden plane flies from Iran to Syria with a cargo of weapons, food and other supplies. The material is then trucked across the border and distributed to various Shiite terrorist groups in Lebanon.
The flights were an essential element in Iran's foreign policy during the tenure of Ayatollah Ruhollah Khomeini, and their continuation under Iran's new President, Hojatolislam Hashemi Rafsanjani, is seen by Administration officials as graphic evidence that Teheran's support for terrorism has not lessened.
In the months after Hojatolislam Rafsanjani became President, some Western experts had hopes, as yet unrealized, that his conciliatory speeches and moves to oust hard-liners from the Government meant Iran would soon lessen its use of terrorism against Western countries.
Instead, Administration officials said, Teheran openly expanded its ties to Palestinian radicals like the Popular Front for the Liberation of Palestine, General Command, the Syrian-based group that intelligence officials believe carried out the bombing of Pan Am 103 over Scotland in December 1988.
 
Aiding Lebanon Captors
The officials said Iran also appeared to have authorized a campaign to kill Saudi diplomats around the world in retaliation for Saudi Arabia's execution of 16 Iranians convicted of bombing an Islamic pilgrimage in Mecca.
The officials said Teheran's support for the Shiite groups in Lebanon had broadened. In addition to aiding the Party of God, the Muslim group holding some of the American hostages, Iran has begun assisting others in Lebanon, including the Amal militia.
The officials did say Iran had turned away from mainly American targets, focusing its use of terrorism on the Saudis and internal opponents, a development several officials said was not significant.
''They haven't changed their spots,'' an Administration official said. ''The true nature of the regime, its use of violence overseas, remains the same. The networks are all still there, and they are still supporting them.''
Administration officials and independent experts said they saw some reason to hope that President Rafsanjani might eventually end the state of hostility between the United States and Iran. But they cautioned that the hard-liners displaced by Mr. Rafsanjani, such as former Interior Minister Ali Akbar Mohtashemi-Pur, have maintained their ties to the Lebanese groups, reducing the new President's freedom to maneuver on such issues as freeing the American hostages. Mr. Mohtashemi, who is now out of the Government, visited Lebanon last month and met with the leadership of the Party of God, Administration officials said.
 
Emphasis on Economy Cited
''Rafsanjani's emphasis on economic issues and improving Iran's image in the world leading up to greater cooperation in the world has all been really quite positive,'' said Gary Sick, an Iran specialist and former White House official who is now at Columbia University. ''The exchange of signals with the United States has been quite interesting. There's been a lot of quiet communication back and forth, mostly through public signals that each side understands.''
''The big exception,'' Mr. Sick continued, ''is on the terrorism side. I don't think there's any evidence that the Iranian use of terror has declined in this period.''
Administration officials cite several incidents involving Iran, including these:
* On July 13, Abdul-Rahman Ghassemlou, leader of an Iranian Kurdish group, was assassinated during a meeting with representatives of the Iranian Government. American officials believe this operation was approved at the highest levels of the Iranian Government.
* On Aug. 26, an Iranian refugee named Bahman Javadi was shot to death in Larnaca, Cyprus, by what were believed to be agents of the Iranian Government.
* On Oct. 16, Abdurreehman Shrewi, a diplomat in the Saudi Arabian Embassy in Ankara, Turkey, lost both legs when a bomb exploded in his car.
* On Wednesday, Mohammed Ali Marzouqi of the Saudi Embassy in Syria was killed by three gunmen in Beirut who, witnesses said, used submachine guns equipped with silencers. Islamic Jihad, the Iranian-backed group that holds some American hostages, said in a statement that it had carried out the assassination to avenge the executions by Saudi Arabia.
 
Opposition Members Killed
Aladdin Touran, a representative of the Iranian opposition group called the People's Mujahedeen, said there had been no lessening of Teheran's attacks against its members and other Iranians. He said the killing of Hossein Keshavarz in Pakistan on Sept. 14 was only the latest example.
''The regime's opponents have been on a hit list, and more than one has been assassinated,'' he said. ''The nature of this regime, which has not been changed by Khomeini's death, is external terrorism and internal repression.''
President Rafsanjani and his colleagues have been quite open in cementing relations with various anti-Western groups.
In July, Ahmed Jabril, the leader of the Popular Front for the Liberation of Palestine, General Command, met with Ayatollah Ali Khamenei, the successor to Ayatollah Khomeini as Iran's religious leader, in Teheran.
On Sept. 22, the Teheran radio reported that a delegation including Mr. Jabril and Saed Musa, widely known as Abu Musa, head of the Fatah Revolutionary Movement, arrived in Iran and over the next week met with senior officials, including President Rafsanjani.


End of Document