U.S. rep blasts Muslim official
St. Petersburg Times (Florida)
November 10, 2006 Friday
0 Edition


Copyright 2006 Times Publishing Company All Rights Reserved
Section: LOCAL & STATE; Pg. 1B
Length: 344 words
Byline: ASJYLYN LODER
Body


U.S. Rep. Ginny Brown-Waite on Thursday angrily refused calls by a Muslim advocacy group to condemn Hernando County Commissioner Tom Hogan and his wife, Mary Ann Hogan, who called Islam a "hateful, frightening religion."
Brown-Waite instead blasted the leader of the Council on American-Islamic Relations' Tampa chapter, accusing him of anti-Catholic comments, saying he staged a 2004 political "ambush" of her meeting with a local doctor and has done little to condemn terrorism by Muslim extremists.
"It's unethical and shameful for a congresswoman to resort to lies and fabrication in order to defend anti-Muslim bigotry," said Ahmed Bedier, executive director of Tampa CAIR.
Brown-Waite called Bedier a "master at manipulation," and accused Bedier of saying: " 'Catholic priests pose more of a terrorism threat by having sex with young altar boys than those who flew the planes into the World Trade Center.' "
"That's a lie. She's twisting it," Bedier said Thursday. "I said we cannot stereotype and blame Islam for the actions of a few individual criminals, just like you cannot blame Catholicism for the actions of a few criminal priests."
Echoing Tom Hogan Sr.'s comments last week, Brown-Waite said Thursday, "It is an accurate truism that by far and wide not every Muslim is a terrorist, but it's historically accurate that every terrorist has been a Muslim with the one exception of the bombing of the Murrah building by Timothy McVeigh."
As for terrorist acts by the Irish Republican Army, Brown-Waite said, "That wasn't in our country."
Bedier said the statement was a mask for anti-Muslim bigotry.
Brown-Waite's letter follows more than a week of controversy surrounding the Hogans' comments. While prominent state leaders and local politicians condemned the couple, the pair say they enjoy wide support from the community.
Tom Hogan Sr. helped found the Republican Party and was its first chairman, and has served as a state committeeman for four decades. Mary Ann Hogan, a former School Board member, served as state committeewoman and chairwoman of the party.

Graphic

 
PHOTO

Load-Date: November 10, 2006


End of Document