U.S. Court of Appeals 2nd Circuit Case Summaries: June 18, 2013
The Daily Record of Rochester (Rochester, NY)
June 18, 2013 Tuesday


Copyright 2013 Dolan Media Newswires All Rights Reserved
Section: NEWS
Length: 295 words
Byline: Daily Record Staff Report
Body


Terrorism
Evidence of Intent — Abuse of Discretion United States v. Defreitas 11-425-cr(L) Judges Walker, Sack and Wesley
Background: The defendants were found guilty of conspiracy to carry out acts of terrorism against the John F. Kennedy International Airport. They were sentenced to life in prison. On appeal, the defendants argued that it was improper to have empaneled an anonymous jury; it was in error to have a terrorism expert testify; the admission of certain photographs was improper; and the failure to declassify a confidential memo was prejudicial. 
Ruling: The Second Circuit affirmed. The court found no fault in determining that, because of the nature of the crime, the jurors would be fearful if their identities were revealed to the defendants. Also, the expert testimony was probative of the intent element of the charged conspiracies. The Second Circuit found the photographs of the defendant posing with assault rifles was probative of intent. With respect to the classified memo, the defendant failed to demonstrate what the defense could gain through the memo’s declassification that was not otherwise available. The court found that a recording of the defendant’s “mm mmm” in response to a statement was not an adoption as it could mean a number of things. Finally, the sentence to life in prison was reasonable. Marshall L. Miller, assistant U.S. attorney, for the appellee; Darrel B. Fields of the Federal Defenders of New York Inc. for the defendant-appellant Russell Defreitas; Arza Feldman of Feldman and Feldman for the defendant-appellant Abdul Kadir; Daniel Nobel for the defendant-appellant Abdel Nur
http://www.nydailyrecord.com/be-the-first-to-know/ Click here for more from this resource.
© 2013 Dolan Media Newswires. All Rights Reserved.

Load-Date: June 25, 2013


End of Document