U.S. removes Sudan from state sponsors of terrorism list
Stillman Advance: Stillman College
December 14, 2020 Monday


University Wire
Copyright 2020 UWIRE via U-Wire All Rights Reserved
Section: WORLD NEWS; Pg. 1
Length: 499 words
Byline: Steven Clarke
Body


The US government added Sudan to its list of "state sponsors of terrorism" in 1993 over allegations that al-Bashir's government was supporting "terrorist" groups.
FILE - In this October 23, 2020 file photo, President Donald Trump talks on a phone call with the leaders of Sudan and Israel, as Treasury Secretary Steven Mnuchin, left, Secretary of State Mike Pompeo, White House senior adviser Jared Kushner, and National Security Adviser Robert O'Brien, applaud in the Oval Office of the White House, in Washington.
Sudan paid a negotiated $335 million settlement to victims of al-Qaeda attacks on United States embassies in 1998.
The United States has formally removed Sudan's designation as a "state sponsor of terrorism", 27 years after putting the country on its blacklist.
Sudan's transitional government, which took over a year ago following Bashir's overthrow, also agreed to recognise Israel, a major goal for Trump, although Khartoum has sought to downplay the connection.
Trump sent his notice to Congress on October 26 and, under U.S. law, a country exits the terror list after 45 days unless Congress objects, which it has not.
A 45-day U.S. Congressional review period followed President Donald Trump's announcement that he would end the listing, days before he announced that Israel and Sudan intend to normalise relations.
Trump supporters protest election in Washington
All they were interested in is "standing", which makes it very hard for the President to present a case on the merits. In his speech, Flynn told the protesters they were all standing inside Jericho after breaching its walls.
As part of a deal, Sudan will pay $335 million ((EURO)275 million) to compensate survivors and victims' families from the twin 1998 attacks on USA embassies in Kenya and Tanzania.
A process to release the settlement money and restore Sudan's sovereign immunity is now stalled in Congress, however.
"This achievement comes with numerous opportunities for Sudan's development", tweeted Prime Minister Abdalla Hamdok, adding that his country "officially" rejoined the worldwide community as a "peaceful nation supporting global stability" after almost three-decade of isolation.
"This achievement. contributes to economic reforms, attracting investments and remittances through official channels, creating new job opportunities for young people, and many other positives". It cut Sudan off from financial assistance and investment, and from the global banking system.
Sudan is on a fragile transition to democracy following an uprising that led to the military's ouster of former autocratic President Omar al-Bashir in April 2019.
Treasury Secretary Steven Mnuchin said Washington would now help Khartoum to seek financing from worldwide lenders and negotiate relief on $60 bln in foreign debt. After Sudan, Morocco also established diplomatic ties with Israel.
"This decision has given us hope that our circumstances will improve", said Mohamed Hassan, a 58-year-old private sector employee in Khartoum.

Load-Date: December 15, 2020


End of Document