U.S. Criticizes Turkish Leader For Libya Trip and Trade Deal
The New York Times
October 8, 1996, Tuesday, Late Edition - Final


Copyright 1996 The New York Times Company
Distribution: Foreign Desk 
Section: Section A; ; Section A;  Page 5;  Column 3;  Foreign Desk ; Column 3; 
Length: 450 words
Byline: AP 
Dateline: WASHINGTON, Oct. 7
Body


The United States sharply criticized Prime Minister Necmettin Erbakan of Turkey today for visiting Libya and signing a deal to triple trade with the Government of Col. Muammar el-Qaddafi, which Washington accuses of sponsoring terrorism.
"We've got to stand together," the State Department spokesman, Nicholas Burns, told reporters.
The Libyan media quoted Mr. Erbakan during his visit to Tripoli over the weekend as criticizing the United States and Israel and describing Libya itself as a victim of terrorism.
"I hope the Prime Minister didn't say those words," Mr. Burns said. "It would be highly surprising if the Prime Minister of an allied country, a NATO country, were to defend a terrorist like Muammar Qaddafi."
The United States has long led a campaign to isolate Libya politically and economically, and Libya is one of seven countries the State Department accuses of sponsoring international terrorism.
In 1992, the United Nations banned air travel and arms sales to Libya. The sanctions are aimed at pressing Libya to hand over two men suspected in the 1988 bombing of a Pan Am jet over Lockerbie, Scotland.
Mr. Erbakan, Turkey's first Prime Minister from an Islamic party, came to power in June after promising to improve Turkey's relations with other Muslim countries.
In August, he visited Iran, which Washington also lists as a terrorist sponsor, and signed a multibillion-dollar natural gas deal. That visit drew similar criticism from the United States and other NATO allies.
"It's up to allies to be good allies and to understand you can't pick and choose places where you are going to support us or not support us," Mr. Burns said. "The United States remains troubled by any trip that could be seen as benefiting the Qaddafi regime."
The deal with Libya to triple trade was signed after 13 hours of talks between Mr. Erbakan and his Libyan counterpart, Abdel Majid el-Qaud. The agreement could raise trade between the two countries to nearly $2 billion a year.
Mr. Erbakan had threatened earlier to leave Libya without signing the agreement because Colonel Qaddafi had condemned a crackdown on ethnic Kurds in Turkey's southeast. He also previously said one goal of his trip was to get Libya to pay some $300 million owed to Turkish contractors, and reportedly made the deal contingent on payment of the debt.
In Tripoli, local media quoted the Turkish leader as describing Libya as being against terrorism and the victim of terrorism itself. He cited a United States air attack on Colonel Qaddafi's home in 1986.
Mr. Erbakan's visit was condemned by members of his own Cabinet. His coalition partner and Foreign Minister, Tansu Ciller, criticized the visit as ill timed and threatened to resign.

Load-Date: October 8, 1996


End of Document