U.S. needs Saudis for war on terrorism
USA TODAY
August 7, 2003, Thursday,
FINAL EDITION


Copyright 2003 Gannett Company, Inc.
Section: NEWS;
Length: 914 words
Byline: Robert Andrews
Body

The U.S.-Saudi relationship appears to be headed toward the rocks, judging from the current furor over 28 classified pages of Congress' report on the attacks of Sept. 11, 2001. They supposedly reveal Saudi connections with Osama bin Laden's al-Qaeda and other terrorist organizations.
But before we decide we no longer need the Saudis, or before we give in to a justified desire to punish them for their duplicity, there's something else we must consider. Ultimately, the Saudis could be the key to our winning the war on terrorism. That's a powerful argument for the United States to maintain its ties, provided the Saudis abandon their support of terrorism's mainspring and use their influence in the Islamic world to end a holy war against the West.
To understand why we are where we are and how critical a role the Saudis could play, we must understand the Machiavellian balancing game the Saudi royal family has played to keep itself in power, and how recent "hinge-of-history" events, such as 9/11 and the wars in Afghanistan and Iraq, have destroyed that balance.
 * The game. The House of Saud rules because it struck a Faustian deal with the extremist Islamic Wahhabist sect in the 1960s. The royals promised to establish and fund the spread of Wahhabi-sanctified Islam as the state religion. In return, Wahhabi leaders agreed to tamp down their denunciations of the royals' Western orientation.
At the same time, the royals entered into a security relationship with the U.S. to protect their oil fields from Iraq and Iran. This involved establishing U.S. bases in the royal kingdom. But the American bases aroused latent Wahhabi anger against the House of Saud.
The princes literally paid billions to direct that anger elsewhere by underwriting the Wahhabi's foreign enterprises: expansion of fundamentalist missionary campaigns (including in the USA) and the fighting of holy wars in such places as the Balkans, Russian-occupied Afghanistan and Sudan.
 * The events. Sept. 11 and the American response are the two events that have irreversibly upset the balance so important to the survival of Saudi royalty. The attacks on the Pentagon and the World Trade Center turned out to be largely due to the planning, funding and execution by Saudi nationals -- Wahhabi jihadists.
The investigations, moreover, hinted at the role of the Saudi royals, who, with riches gained from their oil deposits, had enabled Wahhabism to spread around the world. The deadly irony of this is that without the U.S. defense shield, the Saudi royals may well have been unable to finance this virulent missionary work.
Other destabilizing events were the rapid American military victories in Afghanistan and Iraq. The U.S. demolished the threats Saudi Arabia faced before 9/11. The vaunted prowess of Wahhabi fighters were discredited in Afghanistan. Saddam Hussein's military power was smashed. Leaders in Syria and Iran suddenly discovered virtue in conciliation, and even the Israeli-Palestinian stalemate is showing promise of resolution.
In a blink of history's eye, the Saudis' worst nightmare had come true: America no longer needs to be in Saudi Arabia to dominate the Persian Gulf. And the Saudis can no longer exploit the vulnerability to compel U.S. obeisance and to turn a blind eye to the evil percolating in the Wahhabi mosques and madrassas (religious schools).
However strong the temptation to punish the royals, we must remember two things. First, long before 9/11, the United States knew the game the Saudis were playing and, for a variety of reasons, chose to minimize the dangers that Wahhabi-influenced terrorism posed. Second, the House of Saud is probably our most effective weapon in the war against global terrorism.
The Saudis' potential to do good is based on the same potential to do evil -- their control of holy places and ability to shape Islamic thinking. Currently, too many Muslims, influenced by Wahhabism, consider bin Laden a hero. And too many youth see suicide bombers as role models, providing al-Qaeda and other terrorist groups with a continual stream of eager recruits.
America will not defeat global terrorism until Islamic communities regard jihad as a moral, not violent, struggle for virtue and bin Laden and his ilk not as holy men, but as heretics. American bayonets cannot bring about an Islamic reformation. Such a task may be too much for the Saudi royals, but it should be made clear to them that this is their only path to survival.
There are specific actions the Saudis can take that the United States must monitor. Among these are immediately ceasing all Wahhabi missionary work in the United States, including proselytizing in our prisons and in our armed forces; cutting off funding to "charities" that are fronts for al-Qaeda and other terrorist groups (a U.S. delegation is in Saudi Arabia this week pressing this issue); and removing the Saudi government sponsorship of Wahhabism.
Down to its last prince, the House of Saud must understand that America, to borrow a Marine adage, can be its best friend or its worst enemy. But the princes must know that the time for playing both sides of the fence has forever ended. Riyadh must be brought out of its self-created shadow-shelter of deceit and self-deception. It must be brought to realize that its only chance of survival rests with bringing about an Islam that is more at peace within itself and with the world around it.
***
Robert Andrews, a former Green Beret and CIA officer, is a Washington novelist.

Graphic

 
GRAPHIC, B/W, Web Bryant, USA TODAY (ILLUSTRATION)

Load-Date: August 7, 2003


End of Document