U.S. war court prosecutor charges 3 in terror plots; Guantanamo prosecutor charges 3 in post-9/11 Southeast Asia terrorism plots
Richmond Times Dispatch (Virginia)
December 10, 2017 Sunday
2 Edition


Copyright 2017 Richmond Newspapers, Inc. All Rights Reserved
Section: MAIN; Pg. 4A
Length: 341 words
Byline: Miami Herald
Body


GUANTANAMO BAY NAVAL BASE, Cuba - The U.S. war court prosecutor has issued new charges against the alleged leader of an al-Qaida affiliate in Southeast Asia, blaming him for the 2002 Bali nightclub bombings and this time adding two Malaysian captives to the proposed case as alleged co-conspirators.
A copy of the charge sheet, obtained Saturday by the Miami Herald, accuses Indonesian Riduan bin Isomuddin, known as Hambali, of sending fighters from his Islamic extremist group Jemaah Islamiyah to Afghanistan after the Sept. 11, 2001, attacks to meet with Osama bin Laden and carry out suicide bombings.
 All three of the men arrived at Guantanamo on Sept. 4, 2006, as so-called high-value captives. None has been charged with a crime. President Barack Obama's review boards classified all three men as indefinite detainees in the Law of War, or "forever prisoners" considered too dangerous to release.
 The next step in the proposed case will be for the prosecutor to send the charges to a senior Pentagon official, Convening Authority Harvey Rishikof, to decide whether to go forward with the case.
 The would-be suicide bombers were Bashir Lap, known as Lillie, and Mohd Farik Bin Amin, known as Zubair - two Malaysian prisoners at Guantanamo cast as Hambali acolytes. Together the three are accused of murder, terrorism, attacking civilians and civilian objects, attempted murder, intentionally causing serious bodily injury and destruction of property as a war crime.
 In June, the war court prosecutor charged Hambali, blaming him for the 2002 Bali nightclub bombings and the 2003 attack on the JW Marriott hotel in Jakarta that between them killed more than 200 people. But Army Brig. Gen. Mark Martins, the chief prosecutor, never moved forward on them.
 The new charges still accuse Hambali of a role in the three simultaneous Oct. 12, 2002, bombings in the Indonesian island tourist destination of Bali. But the new charges also accuse Hambali and the two Malaysians of conspiring in the Jakarta bombing of the Marriott, which killed 11 people.

Load-Date: December 10, 2017


End of Document