U.S. PROFESSOR IS ACCUSED OF AIDING MIDEAST TERRORISM;
 INDICTMENT SAYS HE, 7 OTHERS FUNDED PALESTINIAN VIOLENCE
St. Louis Post-Dispatch (Missouri)
February 21, 2003 Friday Five Star Edition


Copyright 2003 St. Louis Post-Dispatch, Inc.
Section: NEWS ; Pg. A1
Length: 974 words
Byline: Karen Branch-Brioso Post-Dispatch Washington Bureau
Dateline: WASHINGTON
Body


A Florida computer engineering professor was arrested Thursday and charged with using a Muslim charity and a think tank he founded to financially aid and organize the Palestinian terrorist group Islamic Jihad.
A grand jury in Tampa, Fla., indicted University of South Florida professor Sami Al-Arian and seven other men. The 50-count indictment alleges a conspiracy that included Al-Arian's attendance at an Islamic conference in St. Louis on Dec. 22, 1988. That meeting was the first conference held by the Islamic Concern Project -- also referred to as the Islamic Committee for Palestine -- that Al-Arian had founded two months earlier.
The indictment says that funds were raised at the St. Louis conference for Islamic Jihad, a group that President Bill Clinton designated as a terrorist group six years later. Al-Arian attempted to recruit one or more individuals to join the group at the St. Louis conference, the indictment said.
The indictment blames Islamic Jihad for a series of terrorist acts, including suicide bombings that killed more than "100 people in Israel and the occupied territories" from the 1990s through last year.
The dead included two U.S. citizens: Alisa Flatow, 20, killed in a 1995 car bombing in the Gaza Strip; and Shoshana Ben-Yishai, 16, killed in November 2001 after her bus was sprayed with automatic gunfire as she rode through a disputed section of Jerusalem.
Al-Arian, 45, has long insisted he has no ties to the group. His attorney, Nicholas Matassini, called the indictment "a work of fiction," according to The Associated Press. "He's a political prisoner right now as we speak," Matassini said.
The indictment shows that the federal government had been wiretapping Al-Arian's phones since at least early 1994. Late in 1995, his former University of South Florida colleague, Ramadan Abdullah Shallah, took over the global leadership of Islamic Jihad in Syria. A few weeks later, FBI agents searched Al-Arian's home and the offices of the World and Islam Studies Enterprise - the think tank he founded where Shallah had taught. Shallah, who is believed to be in Syria, was one of the eight named in the indictment. The think tank was closed and its assets frozen by the government.
"They finance, extol and assist acts of terror," Attorney General John Ashcroft said in announcing the indictment, hours after Al-Arian and three other men were arrested in Florida and Chicago. "Our message to them is clear: We make no distinction between those who carry out terrorist attacks and those who knowingly finance, manage or supervise terrorist organizations. We will bring justice to the full network of terror."
In addition to Al-Arian, those arrested were Sameeh Hammoudeh and Hatim Naji Fariz of Florida; and Ghassan Zayed Ballut of Tinley Park, Ill. Others believed to be abroad in addition to Shallah are Bashir Musa Mohammed Nafi, who lives in Oxfordshire, England; Mohammed Tasir Hassan Al-Khatib, who lives in Lebanon; and Abd Al Aziz Awda, who lives in the Gaza Strip. All are accused of aiding Palestinian terrorism.
After the FBI searches of his offices in the mid-1990s, Al-Arian was placed on two years' leave before being allowed to return to his University of South Florida post. But the university placed him on paid leave again shortly after the Sept. 11 terrorist attacks, when he appeared on Fox News, which had videotapes of him saying "Death to Israel."
At the time, Al-Arian said he didn't advocate killing Israelis, only an end to Israeli occupation of the West Bank. He said his only link to Shallah was an academic one - and that he was shocked when his former colleague took over the leadership of the Islamic Jihad.
The Investigative Project, a Washington think tank that researches Islamic groups and collects audio and videotapes of their conferences, provided the Post-Dispatch with a transcript of Al-Arian's speech at the St. Louis conference Dec. 23-26, 1988, at the Henry VIII hotel on North Lindbergh Boulevard.
Al-Arian spoke in the opening session and also led the crowd in chants of "Death to Israel!" and "Victory to Islam!" and "Rolling, rolling towards Jerusalem!"
Those at the Investigative Project, led by Steve Emerson, were thrilled with the news of the indictments Thursday.
"Steve Emerson was the first to talk about this with his 'Jihad in America', the PBS video in 1994, and a lot of that was about Sami Al-Arian," said Evan Kohlmann, senior terrorism analyst for the Investigative Project. "This indictment was something of an elusive goal for him. He's very pleased with this."
Muslim-American activists raised concerns about the indictment Thursday and its timing.
"We are very concerned that the government would bring charges after investigating an individual for many years without offering any evidence of criminal activity," said Omar Ahmad, board chairman for the Council on American-Islamic Relations. "This action could leave the impression that Al-Arian's arrest is based on political considerations, not security concerns."
Ashcroft said federal prosecutors and the FBI now have access to information that they couldn't access before, thanks to the Patriot Act, an anti-terrorism measure passed in October 2001 that gives law enforcement far greater leeway in sharing information with intelligence agents.
"One of the very valuable benefits of lowering the barrier between the intelligence community and the law enforcement . . . has been the ability to begin using the kind of resources and information that have been available to the intelligence sector in the law enforcement sector," Ashcroft said.
"A very substantial and very important aspect of this case is the facilitation that comes between the intelligence effort and the law enforcement effort, which previously was something we didn't get done - and couldn't get done - because we had those barriers."

Notes

WAR ON TERRORISM; Reporter Karen Branch-Brioso; E-mail: kbranch@post-dispatch.com; Phone: 202-298-6880; * A shorter version of this story appeared in the FIVE STAR LATE LIFT edition on page A12.  

Graphic

 
PHOTO; (1) Color Photo Headshot - (Sami) Al-Arian, Attorney calls indictment "a work of fiction"; (2) Photo from AGENCE FRANCE-PRESSE - Nahla Al-Arian (left), wife of professor Sami Amin Al-Arian, and their daughter, Leena Al-Arian, listen as the attorney for Sami Al-Arian speaks to reporters Thursday outside the Federal Courthouse in Tampa, Fla.

Load-Date: February 21, 2003


End of Document