U.S. NAVY STARTING FLIGHTS OFF LIBYA
The New York Times
January 24, 1986, Friday, Late City Final Edition


Copyright 1986 The New York Times Company
Section: Section A; Page 8, Column 3; Foreign Desk
Length: 891 words
Byline: By BERNARD GWERTZMAN, Special to the New York Times
Dateline: WASHINGTON, Jan. 23
Body


The United States Navy has informed Libyan air controllers that planes from two aircraft carriers will be operating off Libya for the next week, Reagan Administration officials said today.
The officials said the aerial activity was intended as a reminder to Libya of the American naval presence.
It also puts the aircraft carriers close to Libya as the deadline approaches on Feb. 1 for the withdrawal of the remaining 1,000 Americans in Libya, who have been ordered to leave as part of the United States' economic sanctions.
The official notification, in the form of a routine ''notice of intent to conduct flight operations'' from the Sixth Fleet, was sent to the air traffic controller at Tripoli, Libya.
It was required under international aviation procedures because the flight operations would fall within the Tripoli area of control, which extends 100 miles offshore and includes the Gulf of Sidra. Libya regards the entire gulf as part of its territorial waters, but the United States recognizes only a 12-mile territorial limit.
 
Decision Reached on Tuesday
According to the American officials, the decision to begin the carrier operations was taken by the National Security Council on Tuesday.
It was timed for the end of the mission to Western Europe by John C. Whitehead, Deputy Secretary of State, who has been urging allies to take measures against Libya in response to the terrorist attacks on the Rome and Vienna airports on Dec. 27. The United States contends that the attacks were carried out by the Abu Nidal group and that it has received training and support from Libya.
Mr. Reagan has said that if Libya's reported backing for terrorism continues, he is ready to take new steps.
One American official said Col. Muammar el-Qaddafi, the Libyan leader, seemed to believe that the American steps had been limited and that he did not have to fear military moves. The official declined to go into detail on the plans for the two carriers, the Coral Sea and Saratoga.
The Coral Sea carries four squadrons of F-A-18 fighter bombers, a squadron of A-6E bombers and six electronic jamming planes. The Saratoga, which moved into the Mediterranean on Jan. 15, has two squadrons of F-14 fighters, a squadron of A-6E's, a squadron of E2-C radar surveillance planes, and a smaller number of A-7 bombers. There are 12 planes in a squadron.
 
Last Maneuvers a Year Ago
The United States last carried out aerial maneuvers requiring notification one year ago. The last time American planes actually flew over the Gulf of Sidra was in August 1981 when two Navy F-14's shot down two Libyan planes that had threatened them.
In a related development, it came to light today that William J. Casey, Director of Central Intelligence, had said in a speech that the United States should be prepared to make military strikes against countries ''which direct terrorist actions against us'' regardless of whether the actual target is connected to the particular act of terrorism involved.
Mr. Casey's views were expressed in a speech given last April at the Fletcher School of Law and Diplomacy at Tufts University, but were not publicized at the time in Washington. They were reprinted in a book called ''Hydra of Carnage: International Linkages of Terrorism,'' edited by five Fletcher School faculty members.
Although the White House says there was no disagreement on policy toward Libya, Secretary of State George P. Shultz and Defense Secretary Caspar W. Weinberger seem to continue to differ on the use of force.
Mr. Shultz has urged that the United States not appear ''paralyzed'' by insisting on an unambiguous target linked directly to an act of terrorism. Mr. Weinberger has urged caution against ''indiscriminate'' attacks, and his point of view seems to have been accepted by Mr. Reagan.
 
Casey Seems to Side With Shultz
Mr. Casey's comments seemed to put him on the side of Mr. Shultz.
''International terrorism is the ultimate abuse of human rights,'' Mr. Casey said. ''We should be prepared to direct a proportional military response against bona fide military targets of those states which direct terrorist attacks against us. And we need not insist on absolute evidence that the targets were used solely to support terrorism. Nor should we need to prove beyond all reasonable doubt that a particular element or individual in that state is responsible for specific terrorist acts.
''We must demonstrate our will to meet a terrorist's challenge with measured force, applied quickly, whenever the evidence warrants. We cannot permit terrorists and their sponsoring states to feel that we are inhibited from responding or that our response is going to be so bogged down in interminable consultations or debates that we, in fact, do not really have a deterrent.''
One of the reasons given by Mr. Reagan for the decision not to strike against Libya in response for the airport attacks was concern for the safety of Americans living in Libya.
As a result of the sanctions, the only Americans who would be left after Feb. 1 are those in defiance of the Government or those who are permitted to be in Libya for humanitarian reasons, for example, as spouses of Libyans.
The Sixth Fleet has about 15 ships, including the two carriers, off Libya. Nine of the ships are combatants, officials said. Vice Adm. Frank Kelso, the Sixth Fleet commander, is aboard his flagship, Coronado.


End of Document