U.S. must get tough on terror
Telegraph Herald (Dubuque, IA)
June 6, 2000, Tuesday


Copyright 2000, Telegraph-Herald
Section: National/World; Pg. b 12
Length: 449 words
Byline: Associated Press
Body


Commission report: Congress created panel after embassy bombings in 1998
WASHINGTON (AP) - Officials should consider designating Greece and Pakistan as countries "not cooperating fully" in the battle against terrorism and strengthen the category by banning those countries' citizens from traveling here without visas, a blue-ribbon commission says.
Pakistan provides "safe haven, transit and moral, political and diplomatic support to several groups engaged in terrorism" and Greece - a NATO ally - "has been disturbingly passive in response to terrorist activities," according to the National Commission on Terrorism, a panel of private experts and former government officials.
The commission was created by Congress two years ago after bombings of U.S. embassies in Africa. It is due to report to lawmakers on Monday.
Currently, America allows certain countries' citizens to visit the United States for three months without a visa. But Congress should ban countries in the "not cooperating fully" category from the visa-waiver program, the commission said.
Right now, Afghanistan is the only country in the "not cooperating fully" category and Pakistan currently is not in the visa-waiver program.
Greece was just approved for the program, however. U.S. officials said in February they would continue excluding the country until it tightens its passport procedures against fraud.
Other suggestions from the commission include:
* Tracking foreign students in America. The government should keep tabs on such things as changes in students' study plans - a switch from an English literature major to nuclear physics might arouse suspicion, for example.
* Allowing the military to lead the response to any major terrorist attack on U.S. soil, as opposed to the FBI or the Federal Emergency Management Agency.
* Loosening restrictions on the FBI and CIA in opening investigations of terrorist suspects or using informants who might have unsavory backgrounds.
The recommendations have their opponents.
"If implemented, these recommendations would severely damage civil liberties and facilitate abusing behavior by the government, without necessarily producing any increase in security," said Hala Maksoud, president of the American-Arab Anti-Discrimination Committee.
The CIA also says its restrictions - started after the agency admitted close ties to Guatemalan military officers who had committed human rights abuses - have not hindered its intelligence-gathering operations.
"Overall, we just don't believe we face inhibitions related to restrictions," spokesman Bill Harlow said. "There has never been a case when higher-ups were asked to authorize utilizing unsavory people that they didn't say, 'Go ahead."'

Load-Date: June 6, 2000


End of Document