U.S. sifts vendor's files for links to al-Qaeda;
The search, consented to by software firm Ptech, focused on a Saudi listed as a terrorism financier.
 Philadelphia Inquirer
December 7, 2002 Saturday CITY-D EDITION


Copyright 2002 Philadelphia Newspapers, LLC  All Rights Reserved


Section: NATIONAL; Pg. A03
Length: 448 words
Byline: By John Mintz; Washington Post
Body


Federal agents investigating possible financing of terrorists searched the Massachusetts headquarters of a computer software firm that does contracting work for federal agencies, including the FBI and the Federal Aviation Administration.
Before the raid on offices of Ptech Inc. of Quincy, Mass., U.S. government officials looked into whether the company could have compromised or manipulated the software that it provides to federal clients, and concluded that it had not.
The investigation, led by the U.S. Customs Service, focuses on whether Ptech has any financial relationship to a wealthy Saudi businessman and philanthropist, Yasin al-Qadi, whom the U.S. government designated a terrorist financier in October 2001. Qadi denies any tie to terrorism.
The probe began when people associated with Ptech contacted investigators with their concerns that the company might be tied to terrorism financiers, government officials said. No arrests were made; agents recovered evidence from Ptech, which consented to the search. Officials would not specify what was found.
"We're looking into exactly what Qadi's financial ties might be to this company, as well as the allegation that he was a prime bankroller of it," a senior U.S. government official involved in the investigation said. Any financial dealings between the company and Qadi could be illegal because ties to a designated terrorist financier are banned under U.S. law.
Federal law-enforcement officials say Qadi once was a key investor in Ptech. They want to know whether Qadi still has a relationship with the company and whether information obtained in the search could lead them to other entities with which he was involved, a law-enforcement official said, speaking on condition of anonymity.
Ptech officials said they would be surprised to learn that anyone in the small, nine-year-old company was involved in terrorism. "I'd be shocked to find out that something like that was going on in this company," said Joe Johnson, the executive in charge of professional services.
Until yesterday's raid, there had been no public accusations that the company was linked to terrorism. But agents had to move up the date of the raid because numerous news organizations had learned of the government's investigation of Ptech.
The firm provides a range of services for private and government clients, including designing and servicing software involved in data management and communications. Over the last four years it has done about $3 million in nonclassified work for clients that include the FBI, the FAA, the Department of Energy, the Navy, and NATO.
This article contains information from the Los Angeles Times and the Associated Press.

Load-Date: December 7, 2002


End of Document