U.S. CITES RISE IN PLANNING OF GERM WARFARE
St. Louis Post-Dispatch (Missouri)
January 19, 1989, THURSDAY, FIVE STAR Edition


Copyright 1989 St. Louis Post-Dispatch, Inc.
Section: NEWS; Pg. 12A
Length: 666 words
Body


WASHINGTON (AP) - The State Department deplored the spread of biological-weapons capability Wednesday and issued a new report slamming Libya as a sponsor of terrorism.  Citing intelligence sources, State Department spokesman Charles E. Redman said several nations were bent on developing biological weapons - a ''particularly horrible form of warfare,'' he added.  Biological weapons are living organisms that cause lethal diseases such as cholera, anthrax and typhoid. They can be introduced into water systems or simply sprayed into the air.  Iraq reportedly was among those nations identified as having a biological- weapons program. But a U.S. official said the information was ''not 100 percent certain yet.'' The official spoke on condition of anonymity.  Redman said he could not identify ''individual cases'' for security reasons. But a military affairs expert said Tuesday that Iraq and Syria had biological and chemical weapons in their arsenals.  ''There is strong evidence to suggest that Iraq has biological weapons,'' said W. Seth Carus, a researcher at the Washington Institute for Near East Policy.  Israeli officials said Iraq had completed research and development on such weapons and was ''on the verge'' of manufacturing them. They said Syria was in the initial stages of resea rch.  Carus said Iraq has the capability to make 1,000 tons of chemical agents annually. Officials have proof that Iraq used such weapons as mustard and nerve gas against Iran and against the Kurds as recently as 1987.  In Baghdad, Iraq denied producing biological weapons.
Iraq is among 111 nations that signed a 1972 international treaty banning the possession and use of biological weapons. It also signed a convention in 1925 banning the use of chemical or biological weapons in war.  Carus said Syria manufactures chemical weapons but has never used them.  Meanwhile, the State Department's counter-terrorism office reported that Libya continued to support terrorism last year despite a public posture of moderation.  The report, titled ''Libya Unchanged,'' said Libya also had participated directly in at least one operation in Senegal. It said Libyan operatives were active worldwide, especially in Africa, Latin America and the Caribbean.  The Abu Nidal Organization, a Palestinian group with headquarters in Libya, has resumed terrorist operations with ''deadly consequences,'' the report said. It charged that Libya supported several other groups in terrorist operations against U.S. and Western targets.  In a related development, the department said it had obtained a tape recording of Palestine Liberation Organization chief Yasser Arafat threatening to pump ''10 bullets in the chest'' of anyone who attempted to stifle the Palestinian uprising on the Israeli-held West Bank and in Gaza.  The department said Arafat has denied the threat. But if the threat is true, it could jeopardize newly opened talks between with the PLO and the United States.  The United States opened talks with the PLO last month after a 13-year freeze, on the understanding that Arafat had renounced terrorism in all forms and had recognized Israel's right to exist.  The State Department did not indicate it was reconsidering its ''substantive dialogue'' with Arafat. But Assistant Secretary of State Richard W. Murphy said last month that the talks would be suspended if Arafat reneged on his renunciation of terrorism.  Last year, Secretary of State George P. Shultz accused the PLO of terrorism and Arafat of being an accessory and barred the issuance of a visa to Arafat to address the United Nations General Assembly in New York. Shultz later recommended the U.S. talks with the PLO, while maintaining a public campaign against terrorism.  Secretary of State-designate James A. Baker III was noncommittal on the visa question at his Senate confirmation hearing Wednesday. He also declined comment on reports about Iraq's use of biological weapons, saying to do so would compromise U.S. intelligence sources.

Load-Date: October 23, 1993


End of Document