U.S. TELLS JORDAN OF ITS COMMITMENT DESPITE PULLBACK
The New York Times
February 14, 1984, Tuesday, Late City Final Edition


Copyright 1984 The New York Times Company
Section: Section A; Page 1, Column 2; Foreign Desk
Length: 970 words
Byline: By STEVEN R. WEISMAN, Special to the New York Times
Dateline: WASHINGTON, Feb. 13
Body


President Reagan assured King Hussein of Jordan today that his decision to pull back the marines from Beirut did not imply a weakening of his commitment to Jordan and Lebanon in their struggles against Syria.
Mr. Reagan's assurances came at a meeting with the King at the White House that marked the beginning of a round of discussions on the turbulent situation in the Middle East. The President is to follow up the session today with a meeting Tuesday with both King Hussein and President Hosni Mubarak of Egypt.
Mr. Mubarak and the King had dinner together Sunday night, but an American official said he did not regard their getting together as ''historic'' or ''ice breaking.'' The two leaders had met twice before and the Administration has said their presence in town together is a coincidence.
President Reagan assures King Hussein of Jordan at White House that his decision to pull back marines from Beirut does not imply weakening of his commitment to Jordan and Lebanon in their struggles against Syria; criticizes unnamed nations for supporting terrorism in Middle East; photo (M)
'Terrorism Cannot Be Tolerated'
In his statement after the talk with King Hussein, Mr. Reagan criticized nations he said have supported terrorism in the Middle East. He did not single out any nations, but both he and the King have in the past charged that Syria had supported terrorist attacks against Jordan, the United States and others.
''We also agree that terrorism cannot be tolerated and that the leaders of all states must stand together against this new barbarism that threatens civilization,'' Mr. Reagan said. ''States that condone terrorism undermine their own legitimacy.''
The King, who is making an unofficial visit here after a medical checkup in Cleveland and a holiday in Colorado, thanked Mr. Reagan and said, ''On all subjects, sir, that you were kind enough to address, I could not in all honesty say that I could have presented my views differently.''
 
Support for U.N. Resolution
In a briefing after the meeting, an Administration official said the session was marked by expressions of friendship and like-mindedness, particularly on the need to oppose Syrian influence and to achieve progress in returning some autonomy to the Palestinians on the West Bank of the Jordan River.
Once more, the official said, Mr. Reagan told King Hussein that he supported United Nations Security Council Resolution 242, as well as his own peace initiative of Sept. 1, 1982. The King is known to be fearful that these initiatives will be de-emphasized in the struggle to achieve peace in Lebanon.
United Nations Resolution 242 established the principle of returning Arab authority over territory occupied by Israel since 1967 in exchange for peace between Israel and Arab nations. Mr. Reagan's 1982 initiative contemplated Jordan joining the talks over the West Bank, and the talks leading eventually to the area's association with Jordan.
The Administration official said the subject of the pull back of the marines did not come up extensively. He said the President made it clear that the pull back meant no change in the overall American commitment in the region.
''The President assured him of our commitment not to abandon Lebanon,'' said the official, referring to the King. He added that, with regard to ''the military threat to Jordan'' posed by Syria, ''the threat is real and we are unequivocally on Jordan's side.''
 
No Mention of Military Aid
The official made no mention of additional military aid to Jordan. Other officials said, however, that the Congress has been given informal notification that the Administration will sell Jordan 1,613 Stinger antiaircraft missiles with launchers at a cost of $40 million.
In addition, the Administration wants to spend $220 million this year to provide Jordan with logistical equipment and supplies for an 8,000-man Persian Gulf strike force.
Israel and its supporters in the Congress are generally negative toward additional aid to Jordan.
The official said the King had repeated his emphasis that ''the Palestinian problem, and not the Lebanon problem, is the main one, the one to keep our eyes on.'' Speaking for himself, the official said he agreed that the problems in Lebanon were ''a manifestation'' of the unresolved conflict over the fate of the Palestinians.
 
No Timetable for Marines
There were no new statements today by the Administration on the timetable of the pullback of American marines from the Beirut airport to warships off the coast of Lebanon.
Larry Speakes, the White House spokesman, said a timetable would be released Wednesday or Thursday. He repeated earlier statements that the Administration hoped the marines could be withdrawn in 30 days, but that this remained contingent on ''the political and military situation'' in Lebanon.
There has been some confusion in recent days about the timetable, with some White House officials saying they were optimistic the troops could be out soon, and Defense Secretary Caspar W. Weinberger saying he was less certain that this could be done.
Today, speaking of the 30-day timetable, Mr. Speakes said: ''It is feasible, it is practical, it is what we hope to be able to do. We intend to be able to pull them out as quickly as possible. We think they can accomplish their mission as effectively from the ships.''
 
'A Breathing Spell'
Mr. Speakes repeated the Administration's position that the pullback of the marines meant no change in their mission of allowing the Lebanese Government forces ''a breathing spell to rebuild their strength and expand their sovereignty over their territory.''
The Administration official who discussed the meeting with King Hussein went further, suggesting that the pullback would enable the United States to give greater support to the beleaguered Government of President Amin Gemayel of Lebanon.

Graphic

 
photo of President Reagan and King Hussein (page A6)


End of Document