U.S. giving $1.6B to Pakistan; Aid was suspended when ties soured after bin Laden raid
The Tampa Tribune (Florida)
October 20, 2013 Sunday


Copyright 2013 Times Publishing Company All Rights Reserved
Section: NATION & WORLD; NationWorld; Pg. 5
Length: 324 words
Byline: The Associated Press
Dateline: WASHINGTON  
Highlight: US rebuilding ties with Pakistan, releasing huge package of suspended military, economic aid
Body


The United States has quietly decided to release more than $1.6 billion in military and economic aid to Pakistan that was suspended when relations between the two countries disintegrated over the covert raid that killed Osama bin Laden and deadly U.S. airstrikes against Pakistani soldiers.
Officials and congressional aides said ties have improved enough to allow the money to flow again.
American and NATO supply routes to Afghanistan are open. Controversial U.S. drone strikes are down. The United States and Pakistan recently announced the restart of their strategic dialogue after a long pause. Pakistan's new prime minister, Nawaz Sharif, is traveling to Washington for talks this week with President Barack Obama.
But in a summer dominated by foreign policy debates over the coup in Egypt and chemical weapons attacks in Syria, the United States hasn't promoted its revamped aid relationship with Pakistan. Neither has Pakistan.
The silence reflects the lingering mutual suspicions between the two.
The Pakistanis do not like being seen as dependent on their heavy-handed partners. The Americans are uncomfortable highlighting the billions provided to a government that is plagued by corruption and perceived as often duplicitous in fighting terrorism.
Congress has cleared most of the money, and it should start moving early next year, officials and congressional aides said.
During the summer, the State Department and the U.S. Agency for International Development informed Congress that it planned to restart a wide range of assistance, mostly dedicated to helping Pakistan fight terrorism. The United States sees that effort as essential as it withdraws troops from neighboring Afghanistan next year and tries to leave a stable government behind.
Other funds focus on a range of items, including help for Pakistani law enforcement and a multibillion-dollar dam in disputed territory.
Pakistan's embassy in Washington refused to comment on the aid.

Load-Date: October 20, 2013


End of Document