U.S. puts muscle in Mideast alliance
Telegraph Herald (Dubuque, IA)
May 1, 1996, Wednesday


Copyright 1996 Telegraph Herald
Section: Front, Pg. a 1
Length: 372 words
Byline: Associated Press
Body


President Clinton extended U.S. help to Israel in countering terrorism Tuesday and moved toward a defense alliance "to meet common threats in the years to come."
Prime Minister Shimon Peres said the anti-terrorism accord strengthened Israel's hand in pursuing peace with Syria and Lebanon. The peace process would perish if terrorists succeeded, he said, because "terror would win the day."
As Clinton and Peres signed the counterterrorism accord in the Roosevelt Room of the White House, Israel and Hezbollah guerrillas exchanged rocket and mortar fire in southern Lebanon. In the first major incident since a cease- fire brokered by Christopher took effect Saturday, Israel retaliated against guerrilla rockets fired at an outpost of the Israeli-backed South Lebanon Army inside Lebanon.
The U.S. understanding with Israel and Lebanon was designed to protect civilians on both sides from attack but did not rule out exchanges between the Israeli defense force and the guerrillas.
Tuesday's agreement formalized Clinton's offer in March to provide Israel with technology, research and information on terrorists. Peres also gained a U.S. promise to help Israel with a laser defense system against Hezbollah's Katyusha rockets and, in the interim, a possible adaptation of the U.S. Navy's Phalanx missile-defense system designed for warships.
"We must do everything in our power to stop the killing," Clinton said.
Secretary of State Warren Christopher and Israeli Foreign Minister Ehud Barak will head steering committees to carry out the agreement and also to deal with ways to make the $3 billion annual U.S. aid program to Israel more effective.
Throughout his visit, which began Sunday in a meeting with Defense Secretary William Perry, Peres has identified terrorism generally and Iran specifically as Israel's major concerns. By contrast, he has praised PLO Chairman Yasser Arafat as a fighter against terrorism and said Israel wants to pursue peace accords with Lebanon and Syria.
Arafat is scheduled to meet today with Clinton. The business session is intended to set the stage for successful negotiations when Israel and Arafat's Palestinian Authority open a final phase of talks about the future of the West Bank and Gaza this month.

Load-Date: December 9, 1996


End of Document