U.S. Near Deal To Settle Claims By the Iranians
The New York Times
November 21, 1991, Thursday, Late Edition - Final


Copyright 1991 The New York Times Company
Distribution: Foreign Desk
Section: Section A;; Section A; Page 1; Column 2; Foreign Desk; Column 2;
Length: 1143 words
Byline: By ELAINE SCIOLINO,

By ELAINE SCIOLINO,  Special to The New York Times
Dateline: WASHINGTON, Nov. 20
Body


The United States and Iran are nearing final agreement on compensation of about $275 million to Teheran for undelivered Iranian-owned, American-made military equipment dating from before Iran's 1979 revolution, State Department officials said today.
The accord, which follows the release of two Western hostages by Iranian-backed groups in Lebanon on Monday, represents a small but important step toward resolving financial differences between the two countries stemming from the settlement of Iran's 1979 seizure of the American Embassy in Teheran.
The long-awaited agreement is expected to be signed within the next two weeks at the special United States-Iran Claims Tribunal at the Hague, barring any unexpected new demand from the Iranian side.
 
Hostage Link Denied by U.S.
 Although there is no explicit link between the payment and the release of the hostages -- and Administration officials strongly deny such a link -- American officials say both developments were made possible by Iranian concessions, reflecting Teheran's eagerness to put these issues behind it and to win acceptance as a reliable partner by the West.
Negotiations to free the hostages, coordinated by the United Nations, have involved some overt trading, including the release by Israel of Arab prisoners and cooperation from both Syria and Iran, which have ties to the Islamic fundamentalist groups in Lebanon that hold Westerners. It is not clear what, if any, hidden deals are also being struck, but the settlement of claims would be one way the United States and Iran can reward each other for progress in the negotiations.
This specific compensation agreement, a small part of the complex settlement of billions of dollars in financial claims that has been inching forward since 1981, involves American-made military equipment that Iran paid for that was in the United States for repair or used to train Iran military forces in the United States.
Earlier this year Washington and Teheran, negotiating at the claims tribunal in the Hague, agreed that the equipment was worth about $275 million, but the United States said it would not give the full amount directly to Iran. Instead, it offered to pay Iran most of the money, with the remainder going into an escrow account maintained by Iran that is used to reimburse the United States for American claims. Iran initially objected to the plan, American officials said, but agreed recently that about $15 million could go into the escrow account, meaning it will eventually find its way back to the United States.
"This claim was settled in principle a year and a half ago and it's pure coincidence that it's coming together at the same time the hostages are being released," said Abraham D. Sofaer, who conducted the most difficult negotiations when he was the State Department's legal adviser. "Of course the issue of hostages comes up in the negotiations, in that the Iranians say things about the hostages and we say we don't negotiate. This doesn't mean the United States was negotiating a settlement for hostages or that anyone is giving them more money than they deserve. It's just that there's a settlement, then a better relationship and that helps release hostages."
The settlement leaves unresolved other Iranian claims of about $10 billion that arise from the 20-year military sales relationship between Iran and the United States. Mr. Sofaer estimated that the amount owed is probably closer to $1 billion. In addition, claims of billions of dollars filed by American companies and dual nationals against Iran are still pending.
 
Freedom of Hostages
 In an indication that the nearly eight-year hostage ordeal is reaching it denouement, Abbas Musawi, secretary-general of the Party of God, the umbrella group for the captors, indicated in Lebanon today that the last Western hostages, who include three Americans and two Germans, would be freed "in the coming weeks." In an important concession, he added that future releases would not be linked to the freeing of Arab detainees held by Israel.
Iran's official Islamic News Agency, meanwhile, reported from Beirut today that Joseph Cicippio, one of the Americans still held, could go free next week. But the English-language Teheran Times linked the fate of the remaining Western hostages to Arab prisoners in Israeli hands, saying that Israel still needs to be presured to free them.
In Washington, the White House spokesman, Marlin Fitzwater, said that prospects for the liberation of American hostages "look brighter than they have for a long time." He called the statement by the Party of God, or Hezbollah, "an encouraging one," adding, "We have not had those kinds of statements from them before."
The freeing of the American educator Thomas Sutherland and the Anglican Church envoy Terry Waite on Monday and the imminent agreement on Iranian claims help the two countries develop what one senior Administration official described "at best a nonadversarial relationship."
 
Obstacles to Ties Remain
 President Bush has repeatedly said that he would not move to improve relations with Teheran until all American hostages are released. Even then, Iran's continuing support for international terrorism, American distrust of Iran's intentions on such issues as its nuclear projects and Iran's own reluctance to establish ties with Washington remain obstacles in building a relationship, according to Administration officials.
Although the number of incidents of Iranian state-sponsored terrorism dropped dramatically between 1989 and 1990, Administration officials cite Iran's link to the assassination of former Prime Minister Shahpur Bakhtiar of Iran, the officially sanctioned death threat to the author Salman Rushdie and support for radical Palestinian groups as evidence of Iran's involvement in terrorism.
"We've consistently made clear that we are prepared to engage in direct diplomatic discussions with authoritative officials of the Government of Iran on issues of concern to both governments, including the hostages," said a statement prepared by the State Department today. "However, major improvements in our relationship with Iran will not be possible until Iranian support for terrorism and hostage-taking has ended."
At a time when Iran is struggling to move to a free market economy, the United States wields considerable influence over efforts by other countries to sell goods and technology to Iran. Last summer, Washington prevented Britain from selling planes to Iran that contained American components, citing Teheran's failure to move on the hostages. Recently, the State Department has pressed India to halt discussions with Iran on the transfer of a nuclear reactor.
Mr. Bush has been eager to resolve the remaining financial disputes with Iran, but the tortuous, extraordinarily complicated process has dragged on since the tribunal was established in 1981.

Load-Date: November 21, 1991


End of Document