U.S. ratchets up terrorism alert
 The Philadelphia Inquirer
September 11, 2002 Wednesday CITY-D EDITION


Copyright 2002 Philadelphia Newspapers, LLC  All Rights Reserved


Section: Pg. A01; news
Length: 980 words
Byline: Diego Ibarguen and Seth Borenstein Inquirer Washington Bureau
Dateline: WASHINGTON
Body


The Bush administration raised the nation's terrorism-warning level yesterday to Code Orange - the second-highest risk - after receiving what it termed credible new threats connected to today's anniversary of the Sept. 11 terrorist attacks.
In addition, Secretary of Defense Donald H. Rumsfeld ordered antiaircraft missiles to be deployed around Washington to strengthen air defense in the capital. The decision was "not a response to any specific threat, but is a prudent precaution," according to a Pentagon announcement.
Vice President Cheney moved to an undisclosed secure location yesterday and canceled his only public appearance. Cheney, whose whereabouts were undisclosed for weeks after last Sept. 11 to help ensure the continuity of the presidency, also spent Monday night at a secret secure location.
There were specific threats against U.S. interests abroad but less credible concerns that terrorists might attack the United States again. As a result, in the Philadelphia area, officials generally said they were on guard and cautious but were not planning unusual security measures.
Philadelphia Police Commissioner Sylvester M. Johnson said he was not making changes as a result of the new terror alert. His spokesman, Inspector Bill Colarulo, said the city has been on "heightened alert" since last Sept 11.
Edwin Truitt, director of Delaware County's Emergency Services Department, said he broadcast the terror warning to all fire and police agencies in the county yesterday. He said the county is home to numerous industrial facilities.
Robert Lythgoe, police chief of Tinicum, said he would have additional personnel scheduled today because a majority of Philadelphia International Airport lies in his Delaware County township. "We are just like everyone. We are all concerned and more aware," Lythgoe said.
Capt. Allan Ewing of the Pottstown Police Department, one of the bigger departments near Limerick Nuclear Power Plant, said the department was not doing anything special or different because of the alert.
John D. Dougherty Jr., emergency management coordinator for Bucks County, said the county planned to go ahead with its memorial ceremonies. But, he said, security was on a heightened alert at government facilities.
Peco Energy Co. spokeswoman Cathy Engel said she could not discuss specifics of the company's security plan, but she said that after last year's attacks, the company did "vulnerability assessment" of its infrastructure, such as its energy-delivery and computer systems, and made any needed upgrades.
"We have all our security measures in place… so we can respond" to any government warnings, Engel said.
In Cherry Hill, Police Lt. Robert English said the department had "frozen all leave" in order to have as many officers available as possible.
"In preparation for the anniversary, we have increased manpower on the street and increased visibility," he said. "We'll have officers stationed at all the buildings of worship, and increased patrols at government buildings."
Michael King, deputy chief of detectives for the Burlington County Prosecutor's Office, said there were no credible threats to the county, "so we're just operating with a heightened sense of awareness."
The prosecutor's office acts as the liaison between the Joint Terrorism Task Force and local municipalities in Burlington County.
Nationally, the flurry of heightened security measures tightened Americans' nerves, but Attorney General John Ashcroft said intelligence analysis indicated that any new attacks were more likely to target U.S. sites overseas.
The government's heightened terror alert came one day after the State Department issued a general alert warning Americans abroad to be vigilant this week. Yesterday, the department announced that four embassies in Southeast Asia and nine other diplomatic facilities around the world would close temporarily.
"There is a real threat on a global basis that Americans need to be aware of. Americans need to be careful, they need to be vigilant, they need to pay attention to their surroundings," State Department spokesman Richard Boucher said.
Ashcroft said the decision to raise the national threat level from "elevated risk" to "high risk" was based on information gleaned from an unidentified senior al-Qaeda operative, who warned of "possible terrorist attacks timed to coincide with the anniversary of the Sept. 11 attacks." Ashcroft said "valuable" and "significant" information had been learned within the previous 24 hours.
A U.S. official, speaking on condition of anonymity, said the most recent information was provided within the last day or two from a key al-Qaeda member who has been in custody for several months. The official would not say where the person was arrested, nor would he name the detainee, saying, "It's not a household name."
Senior U.S. intelligence officials said the new information related to an al-Qaeda-backed plan to bomb the U.S. Embassy in Jakarta, Indonesia, and possibly other U.S. targets in Malaysia and elsewhere in Southeast Asia.
Ashcroft said al-Qaeda cells in several South Asian countries had been accumulating explosives since January, preparing "to conduct car-bomb and other attacks on U.S. facilities."
The intelligence community also has learned that one or more individuals in the Middle East are preparing for suicide attacks on U.S. interests, he said. Ashcroft said there was no specific information on where such attacks might occur.
At the State Department, officials said more than a dozen embassies or consulates would close for the time being because of security concerns, including offices in Indonesia, Lebanon, Bahrain, Vietnam, Pakistan, Malaysia, Cambodia, Malawi, Tajikistan and Abu Dhabi.
Contact Diego Ibarguen at 202-383-6026 or dibarguen@krwashington.com. Inquirer staff writers Steve Esack, Sam Wood and Thomas J. Gibbons Jr. contributed to this article.  

Load-Date: September 11, 2002


End of Document