U.S. attacks on terrorists 'significant'
USA TODAY
August 24, 1998, Monday,
INTERNATIONAL EDITION


Copyright 1998 Gannett Company, Inc.
Section: NEWS;
Length: 368 words
Byline: Andrea Stone
Dateline: WASHINGTON
Body


WASHINGTON -- Last week's U.S. missile attacks against what U.S.
officials described as terrorist training camps had "significant
impact on the terrorist planning activities," Secretary of State
Madeleine Albright said Sunday.
While U.S. officials are still evaluating damage from the attacks
on sites in Afghanistan and Sudan, Albright claimed they had hurt
Saudi exile Osama Bin Laden's suspected ability to conduct a terrorist
campaign against Americans.
Defense Secretary William Cohen told NBC's Meet the Press
the United States struck when it did because it had evidence of
a gathering of bin Laden followers at the sites.
"We didn't know if he would be there or not," Cohen said. "He
was not our target as such. We were targeting his infrastructure
and his network and we believe that was a mission accomplished."
In the wake of the attacks, U.S. officials continued to ratchet
up security measures at airports and government installations
to guard against what the CIA called a "very, very high" threat
of retaliation.
U.S. embassies worldwide remained on heightened alert. Police
placed concrete barriers around the Washington Monument and travelers
encountered heightened airport security checkpoints.
"We are at war with terrorism. Terrorism has replaced modern
warfare," Sen. Arlen Specter, R-Pa., said on Fox News Sunday.
But the attacks drew protests from the Arab world. The Organization
of the Islamic Conference said Sunday it was deeply concerned
by the U.S. attacks and called for terrorism to be countered through
the United Nations, not unilateral action.
The statement echoed a renewed demand Sunday by Sudan for a U.N.
inquiry.
The Clinton administration rejected the pleas, calling the strikes
a self-defense move against further terrorist actions. In his
weekly radio address, President Clinton said the United States
would continue to fight Osama bin Laden's terrorist organization.
U.S. officials also revealed Saturday that Clinton had signed
an executive order Thursday blocking all financial transactions
between the Saudi millionaire's organization and U.S. companies
or individuals.
"It takes money -- lots of it -- to build the network bin Laden
has. We'll do our best to see that he has less of it," Clinton
said.

Load-Date: August 25, 1998


End of Document