U.S. REVIEWING FARRAKHAN'S TRIP< HE VISITED LIBYA AND CUBA IN SEPTEMBER.< BOTH ARE UNDER ECONOMIC EMBARGOES FOR SUPPORTING TERRORISM.
 The Philadelphia Inquirer
OCTOBER 18, 1996 Friday SF EDITION


Copyright 1996 Philadelphia Newspapers, LLC  All Rights Reserved


Section: NATIONAL; Pg. A36
Length: 303 words
Byline: Michael J. Sniffen, ASSOCIATED PRESS
Dateline: WASHINGTON
Body


Nation of Islam leader Louis Farrakhan's September trip to Libya and Cuba is being reviewed by the Justice Department for possible violations of U.S. law.
The trip prompted Justice officials to extend the inquiry into Farrakhan's travels that they began last January when he visited Libya and other countries that are under U.S. economic embargoes for supporting terrorism.
On the second trip, Farrakhan postponed accepting a $1 billion gift and a $250,000 award from Libyan leader Moammar Gadhafi because the Treasury Department refused to authorize it. Farrakhan said he would challenge the Treasury's ruling in U.S. courts.
The Treasury is empowered to grant exceptions to the economic embargoes for humanitarian reasons. Farrakhan had said he would use the money for voter registration drives and economic development among blacks in this country.
But the Treasury said in August that the United States "is convinced that the government of Libya remains a strong supporter of terrorist groups" and that it would be "inconsistent with current U.S. foreign policy" to allow Farrakhan to accept Gadhafi's money.
The Supreme Court has ruled that U.S. citizens have a constitutional right to travel anywhere in the world.
The only remaining law against traveling to embargoed countries bars using a U.S. passport to do so. Another law prohibits spending U.S. currency in such countries. But Justice officials have said embargoed countries learned years ago that their U.S. visitors could avoid violating these narrowly written statutes if the host country paid their expenses and did not stamp their passports.
The Justice review also has examined whether Farrakhan had become an agent of the Libyan or other governments. A top aide to the black Muslim leader sent the government a letter in March denying that this had happened.

Load-Date: October 28, 2002


End of Document