U.S. braces for terrorism rise
The Atlanta Journal and Constitution
December 14, 1998, Monday,
JOURNAL EDITION


Copyright 1998 The Atlanta Constitution
Section: NEWS; Pg. 12A
Length: 461 words
Series: Final
Body


The threat of terrorist violence against Americans at home and abroad is escalating, led by Muslim extremist Osama bin Laden, according to a published report this week. The exiled Saudi Arabian could be targeting New York and Washington for deadly bombing attacks, Time magazine said, quoting U.S. intelligence sources. The bloody violence may come as bin Laden plans his revenge on the United States for the cruise-missile attacks that blew up his terrorist camps in Afghanistan in August, according to a report in this week's issue of Time.
The U.S. bombings were counterattacks for the two simultaneous blasts at U.S. embassies in Kenya and Tanzania Aug. 7. Those explosions killed 224 people, 12 of them Americans.
New York Mayor Rudolph Giuliani was tight-lipped about the Time report, the New York Post reported today. "I obviously don't discuss intelligence," the Post quoted Giuliani as saying Sunday.
Security around City Hall, police headquarters and federal buildings in lower Manhattan has been dramatically stepped up since two suspects in the Kenya bombing were taken to New York for trial, the Post reported.  The suspects, both with ties to bin Laden, are being held in the federal prison.
"I think any person of common sense would understand the reason for the increased security if you just live in the real world that we live in," Giuliani told the Post. Among other likely city targets are the World Trade Center, the Empire State Building, Times Square and Rockefeller Center during the holidays. Time quoted unidentified intelligence sources as saying Attorney General Janet Reno invited 200 Washington officers to FBI headquarters in October to investigate how to react if terrorists targeted the nation's capital.
The team, working under the code name Poised Response, explored four scenarios: A car-bomb attack, chemical warfare at a Redskins football game, explosives at a federal building and an assassination attempt on Secretary of State Madeleine Albright, Time reported.
Bin Laden is believed to be behind the embassy bombings, as well as other plots to kill Americans, beginning in 1989.
Sunday, the U.S. embassy in Saudi Arabia warned Americans of a strong possibility of a terrorist attack on U.S. targets in the Gulf in the next month and advised them to exercise caution.
"The embassy has information indicating a strong possibility that terrorist elements are planning an attack against U.S. targets in the Gulf, possibly in the next 30 days,'' said the message to Americans. "All American citizens should remain alert to any suspicious activity and take precautionary steps to reduce the profile and vulnerability of any U.S. facilities." The warning was issued to Americans in Kuwait, Saudi Arabia, Bahrain and the United Arab Emirates.

Load-Date: December 15, 1998


End of Document