U.S., Israel show united front against Middle East terrorism
The Tampa Tribune (Florida)
May 1, 1996, Wednesday,
FINAL EDITION


Copyright 1996 The Tribune Co. Publishes The Tampa Tribune
Section: NATION/WORLD,
Length: 445 words
Dateline: WASHINGTON
Body


President Clinton extended U.S. help to Israel in countering terrorism Tuesday and moved toward a defense alliance "to meet common threats in the years to come."
Prime Minister Shimon Peres said the anti-terrorism accord strengthened Israel's hand in pursuing peace with Syria and Lebanon. The peace process would perish if terrorists succeeded, he said, because "terror would win the day."
An Associated Press Report
Clinton and Peres then had lunch, and afterward announced they had agreed to explore formalizing the two countries' longtime military relationship.
"U.S.-Israeli strategic cooperation will grow in importance" in view of the proliferation of weapons of mass destruction in the Middle East and other threats to regional peace, the White House said in a statement.
Secretary of State Warren Christopher and Israeli Foreign Minister Ehud Barak will head steering committees to carry out the agreement and trying to make the $ 3 billion annual U.S. aid program to Israel more effective.
Clinton and Peres also discussed the threat from Iran's nuclear program, said a senior U.S. official, speaking on condition of anonymity.
Throughout his visit, which began Sunday in a meeting with Defense Secretary William Perry, Peres has identified terrorism generally and Iran specifically as Israel's major concerns. By contrast, he has praised PLO Chairman Yasser Arafat as a fighter against terrorism and said Israel wants to pursue peace with Lebanon and Syria.
Peres also met with House Speaker Newt Gingrich and Minority Leader Dick Gephardt, who pledged their continued backing.
Tuesday's agreement formalized Clinton's offer in March to provide Israel with technology, research and information on terrorists. During his visit Peres also gained a U.S. promise to help Israel with a laser defense system against Hezbollah's Katyusha rockets and, in the interim, a possible adaption of the U.S. Navy's Phalanx missile-defense system designed for warships.
Clinton's support for Israel and showcasing of Peres, who is in a tough battle for election May 29, seems designed to boost the prime minister and endorse his policy of trading land for peace with the Arabs.
The leader of Israel's Likud opposition, Benjamin Netanyahu, is more skeptical of Arab promises. While he is committed to Palestinian autonomy, he also is dubious about an Israeli pullback from the occupied Golan Heights, a buffer of 470 square miles in Syria.
Clinton said inviting Peres here now was "extremely appropriate" and "the right thing to do." He told reporters also that Israeli voters "have shown pretty good judgment a long while now."
Arafat is scheduled to meet with Clinton at the White House today.

Graphic

 
PHOTO,
 Israeli Prime Minister Shimon Peres and President Clinton sign a declaration against terrorism Tuesday at the White House. Associated Press photo

Load-Date: May 3, 1996


End of Document