U.S. Will Add a Third Level to Warnings of Terrorism
The New York Times
December 8, 2015 Tuesday
Late Edition - Final


Copyright 2015 The New York Times Company
Section: Section A; Column 0; National Desk; Pg. 20
Length: 462 words
Byline: By MICHAEL S. SCHMIDT; Julie Hirschfeld Davis contributed reporting from Washington, and Nicholas Fandos from Sterling, Va.
Body


WASHINGTON --  The Department of Homeland Security plans to change the terrorism alert system so it can provide general advisories to the public about threats, national security officials said on Monday.
Under the current system, there are two levels for threats: imminent and elevated. A new level will be added to cover less serious threats, though officials declined to say what it will be called.  
  ''It wouldn't be specifics like time and place,'' one of the officials said. ''It would be along the lines of terrorists have expressed interest in attacking this type of target.''
  The department has never issued a warning under the current system, which was established in 2010. It replaced the five-color warning system created by the Bush administration after the Sept. 11, 2001, attacks. That program was widely criticized because it scared many people when it was elevated, but provided few details about what the public should do or what the threat was.
  Under the current system, the department has defined an imminent threat as one in which the government has intelligence about the time and place of a planned attack. An elevated threat is defined as one in which the government has information that an attack may be planned but lacks specifics about when and where.
  Speaking Monday evening after a closed-door discussion on civil liberties at an Islamic center in Sterling, Va., Jeh Johnson, the secretary of Homeland Security, said the change had been in the works for several months, long before the shooting in San Bernardino, Calif., that killed 14 people and wounded 21. But he declined to offer details.
  Earlier in the day, Mr. Johnson announced at a conference for Defense One, a national security news website, that the warning system would be changed.
  ''We need a system that adequately informs the public at large, not through news leaks of joint intelligence bulletins to law enforcement, not through leaks from anonymous government officials,'' Mr. Johnson said.
  He said that the government needed to be able to inform ''the public at large what we are seeing'' and ''what we are doing about it and what we are asking the public to do.''
  Officials at the White House said Mr. Johnson was referring to a review of the National Terrorism Advisory System that had been underway ''for some time'' to identify changes to improve it.
  ''These are still reforms being considered,'' said the White House spokesman, Josh Earnest. ''You should not consider this a replacement of the program, but rather some important reforms that would allow it to be more effectively used to communicate with the American public.''
  Follow the New York Times's politics and Washington coverage on Facebook and Twitter, and sign up for the First Draft politics newsletter.

http://www.nytimes.com/2015/12/08/us/politics/us-will-add-a-third-level-to-warnings-of-terrorism.html

Load-Date: December 8, 2015


End of Document