U.S. cities brace for the next acts of terrorism
USA TODAY
September 24, 2001, Monday,
FINAL EDITION


Copyright 2001 Gannett Company, Inc.
Section: NEWS;; COVER STORY
Length: 2735 words
Byline: Peter Eisler, Fred Bayles and Dan Vergano
Body

The hijacked jets that slammed into the World Trade Center and the Pentagon shattered the government's most basic theories about how to plan for mass terrorism on U.S. soil and exposed gaping vulnerabilities to an unprepared nation.
In New York, which was widely viewed as the city best prepared for a major terrorist strike, emergency planners and terrorism experts spent years mulling scores of attack scenarios, including that of a small plane ramming the World Trade Center. But they never dreamed up anything like the real-life suicide jet crashes on Sept. 11.
Now, as President Bush girds the country for a global "war on terrorism," emergency planners in communities large and small are scrambling to prepare for more terrorism attacks at home.
A survey out today by the National League of Cities finds that more than half of U.S. cities are reevaluating emergency response plans based on the strikes. The key questions: What will terrorists do next, and are we ready?
Fears about the nation's susceptibility to terrorists armed with biological or chemical weapons loom far more ominously today than they did before Sept. 11. Osama bin Laden, chief suspect in the World Trade Center and Pentagon attacks, is believed to have experimented with agents that might be used in such weapons. A Detroit man held for questioning has a trucking license for hazardous materials, such as explosives, poison gases and radioactive material.
Fear of biological weapons that could spread anthrax, smallpox and other fatal viruses or bacteria has sent thousands of Americans searching for vaccines that simply don't exist. The specter of a chemical attack, such as the nerve gas unleashed by terrorists in a Tokyo subway in 1995, has gas masks disappearing from store shelves.
"Once (terrorists) cross the threshold of creating mass casualties, the jump to using a biological or chemical weapon becomes a whole lot smaller," says L. Paul Bremer, former U.S. ambassador-at-large for counterterrorism and chairman of the National Commission on Terrorism, which warned last year of new homeland threats. The attacks of Sept. 11 "broke us across that threshold. It's certainly something to worry about."
Yet the potential for biological, chemical or even nuclear attacks in America is just a piece of the problem. Most experts say that ordinary explosives and other "conventional" weapons remain the most likely means of attack, but "conventional" was redefined Sept. 11. Threats under discussion these days range from truck bombs to the sabotage of water and food supplies to small planes hitting chemical or nuclear plants.
Most big cities have a fraction of the medical capacity to handle "mass casualty" events. In many, fire and rescue workers lack the most basic equipment for responding to weapons of mass destruction. Even the mighty U.S. military, forced to watch without a contingency plan as a hijacked jet plunged into the Pentagon, seems unprepared to stop an imminent attack. "The reassessment," says Bremer, now a terrorism consultant with MMC Enterprise Risk, "is going to be quite dramatic."
New threats, new needs
Four hours after the two hijacked jets hit the World Trade Center, the Centers for Disease Control and Prevention (CDC) issued a "Health Alert" for U.S. hospitals "to monitor for any possible unusual disease patterns associated with (the attacks), including chemical and biological agents."
Though there is great debate over the likelihood that terrorists would be able to use such agents, the CDC alert shows how real the threat became.
Experts note that some biological toxins, such as anthrax, are relatively easy to produce. However, "weaponizing" them for dispersal, especially in ways that would infect large numbers of people, requires special knowledge and logistical skill. Even so, most federal planners say the threat is increasingly potent. The government went so far as to ground crop-dusting planes briefly last week, and they were re-grounded Sunday while the FBI continues to probe whether terrorists planned to taint crop-dusting chemicals.
Several countries seen as sympathetic to terrorists, such as Iraq and Libya, are suspected of having chemical and biological arms programs. Intelligence reports that bin Laden apparently experimented on dogs with chemical or biological agents are compounding officials' fears.
In general, chemical attacks are considered more likely than biological but easier to handle. They're like any big hazardous materials spill, officials say. Biological weapons, though seen as less probable, could be more deadly.
Outside Evansville, Ind., German Township Fire Chief John Buckman says many communities' preparations for chemical and biological attacks are in a "state of flux."
"The federal initiative has been to train the 120 largest cities and provide information to responders, but that hasn't helped many of the 32,000 fire departments" nationwide, says Buckman, head of the International Association of Fire Chiefs. "We need basic equipment like filter masks, things that allow you to function."
The system's weaknesses
In a bioterror exercise at Andrews Air Force Base outside Washington in June, public officials such as former senator Sam Nunn role-played the response scenarios. "Boy, did they struggle," says Tara O'Toole of the Johns Hopkins University Center for Civilian Biodefense Studies in Baltimore.
Many political leaders don't grasp the realities of bioterrorism, O'Toole says. An attack might go unnoticed at first as just a few victims turn up sick. Then waves of fevered, coughing, retching people would overwhelm hospitals, most of which lack the drug stocks, equipment and staffing to handle a big surge in emergency patients. Casualties among medical workers would compound the crisis.
Federal spending to combat and prepare for terrorism has skyrocketed, eclipsing $ 11 billion this year, but there are continuing questions about how smartly it's spent.
President Clinton issued several directives meant to streamline and coordinate the dizzying array of federal agencies responsible for the nation's emergency response plan. The FBI and the Federal Emergency Management Agency (FEMA) were given the lead and, by most accounts, communication has improved and wasteful overlap of responsibilities has diminished.
Now, Bush aims to further clarify roles and missions by creating a new Cabinet-level Office of Homeland Security, headed by Pennsylvania Gov. Tom Ridge. The office will oversee all domestic anti-terrorism efforts, including emergency planning and response.
"There's never been the development of really comprehensive plans for how we would really knit all this together," says one senior official charting the office's role.
One immediate challenge: vaccine and pharmaceutical stocks.
Thousands of U.S. military personnel have yet to receive anthrax vaccines, and shots for civilians are virtually non-existent. "Our first obligation is to meet the demand of the Department of Defense," says Kim Brennan Root, spokeswoman at BioPort, the only licensed U.S. manufacturer of anthrax medication.
Vaccines for other bioweapons, such as smallpox, are even more sparse. And some federal drug stockpiles aren't always well stored. In March, congressional investigators found that one of the nation's five major stockpiling sites, a facility housing 20% of drug and vaccine reserves, stored supplies at temperatures far above those needed to keep them viable.
The strikes on the World Trade Center, where hundreds of firefighters and rescuers were killed in the buildings' subsequent collapse, hinted at the new challenges for emergency planners.
"We'd thought about planes hitting the Trade Center and other facilities, but most of the thinking was that it would be a small private plane," says Jerome Hauer, former head of New York City's emergency preparedness office. "We planned for mass casualty incidents, but we never really planned for one where you lost a third of the responders.  . . .  Two planes hitting the towers in 15 minutes? This isn't what we thought of as a conventional attack."
A massive loss of medical and rescue personnel is something usually associated with a biological strike, when doctors and emergency workers would be infected. Even in New York, which has prepared extensively for such a crisis, "we're not nearly as prepared as we should be," says Hauer, now a terrorism consultant with Kroll Associates. "For anyone in the country at this point to say they're prepared for bioterrorism is just not true."
On the positive side
In many respects, there were positives in the way the response system worked in New York City -- and nationwide.
The Federal Emergency Response Plan was implemented relatively smoothly. Law enforcement agencies across the country went on high alert; security was beefed up at public buildings. Air traffic was grounded. Hospitals across the country were readied to take overflow casualties.
Jim Thacker, director of emergency management in Nashville, immediately arranged with local hospitals and state and national officials to bring in wounded by air. "The system worked," says Thacker, a past critic. "We have an organizational chart now and know who to go to and what to do."
But in one way, this was no test.
"We didn't stress the hospital situation because we had no survivors," Bremer says. "We don't know what would have happened if we'd had thousands of survivors. That didn't get stressed as it would in some other form of mass casualty attack."
Many communities are taking hard lessons from the World Trade Center and Pentagon attacks, and there are no passing grades.
The day before the strikes, officials in Los Angeles, which has faced anthrax and bomb threats recently, trained for a terrorist attack on city water and power systems. Through such exercises, the city's planners have learned they need far more than the $ 1 million or so they've received from the federal government.
"If we had a serious chemical or biological attack, we wouldn't be able to send large numbers of rescuers in with protective suits," says Bob Canfield of the city's emergency preparedness office. "We only have a limited number of decontamination suits. They could be counted on both hands."
After the New York attacks, Los Angeles officials geared up emergency plans in coordination with FEMA and the FBI, but they got no federal order to do so. Now, they're re-evaluating their response mechanisms, Canfield says, recognizing that responding to a similar strike in L.A. would be "very difficult."
In Washington, the city where federal and local officials truly work side by side, the strike on the Pentagon provided a more immediate and sobering lesson.
Communication and coordination between federal and state responders in the capital crumbled. Street closings and building evacuations were haphazard and poorly coordinated. Local emergency officials waited 3 hours to hold public briefings on whether and how people should leave the city.
Mayor Anthony Williams says the city, along with federal agencies, will overhaul response plans.
The notion that Washington was ill prepared for a terrorist attack strikes at the heart of U.S. notions of security. The risk of additional attacks kept Bush from the White House for much of the day. And it raised perhaps the most troubling question emergency planners have had to face: Could the military attack a commercial airliner carrying innocent passengers if it posed an imminent terrorist threat?
"We don't have air defenses that are designed to protect the American people from a person taking off in the United States in an airliner filled with American citizens," Defense Secretary Donald Rumsfeld said this week.
National security officials knew shortly after the World Trade Center crashes that two other jets had been hijacked and were headed to Washington. They hurriedly scrambled fighter jets to intercept the stolen aircraft, but the first crashed into the Pentagon 15 minutes before the fighters arrived.
As the second jet bore down on Washington, the president's aides sought and obtained his permission to have it shot down. It was the first such order in U.S. history, a grim statement of how profoundly the terrorist threat in the United States shifted on Sept. 11.
And it was too late.
By the time the fighters reached their intercept point, the passengers on the hijacked jet had taken care of the problem themselves. It crashed in Pennsylvania.
***
Contributing: Anita Manning, Jonathan Weisman, Kevin Johnson
TEXT WITHIN GRAPHICS BEGINS HERE 
Biological warfare
Defense experts say these are the biological warfare agents that authorities believe terrorists might use, the symptoms they produce and the amount of time it takes for each to cause death:
Tularemia
Symptoms -- ulcers, swollen lymph nodes, fever, pneumonia -- appear within 2 weeks but usually 3-5 days after exposure.
Death: In 5% of untreated cases.
Vaccines and treatment: The military has one, but treatment with antibiotics after exposure is as effective.
Smallpox
Symptoms -- high fever, fatigue, head and backaches -- begin about 12 days after exposure, followed in 2-3 days by a rash and lesions on face, arms and legs.
Death: Without vaccination, in 30% of cases, usually during the first 2 weeks of illness.
Vaccines and treatment: Routine vaccination stopped in 1972, but about 15 million doses are available, and more are in production.
Plague
Symptoms -- high fever, chills and headache -- begin 1-6 days after exposure and progress quickly to severe breathing difficulty and coughing blood.
Death: Within 2-4 days
Vaccines and treatment: There is a vaccine for bubonic plague, which is carried by fleas, but it is not effective against the aerosolized form that would be used in bioterrorism. Antibiotic treatment started within 24 hours of symptoms can improve chances of survival.
Anthrax
Symptoms -- fever, fatigue, cough and chest discomfort at first, followed by severe breathing difficulty, sweating and turning blue -- begin within 6 says of exposure.
Death: 24-36 hours after severe symptoms begin.
Vaccines and treatment: Must begin 18 months before exposure to be fully effective, though there is evidence of some protection after the first three doses (given over 4 weeks). Treatable with antibiotics if given within 3-7 days after exposure.
Viral hemorrhagic fever
Symptoms -- high fever, muscle-aches, chills and diahrrhea -- begin within a few days of infection, depending on the virus (Ebola, Marburg, others), followed by sever chest pain, shock and bleeding.
Death: Within a week
Vaccines and treatment: The diseases are not always fatal. No vaccines exist for hemorhagic fevers, except for yellow fever and Argentine hemorrhagic fever.
Botulism
Symptoms -- double or blurred vision, slurred speech, difficulty swallowing and progressive weakness that descends the body, starting at shoulders -- usually begins 12-36 hours after eating botulism-tainted food.
Death: Paralysis of breathing muscles can cause death within 24 hours of first symptoms unless the patient is put on a ventilator.
Vaccines and treatment
The Centers for Disease Control and Prevention keeps and national suply of anti-toxin.
*****
How they could attack
Threat - The anthrax bomb: A vial of anthrax toxin is shattered in a subway. The air circulation in the subway spreads the toxin. Commuters unknowingly take it home. By the time the first cases start showing up, tens of thousands of people could be infected.
Technical problems: Airborne biologicals tend not to last too long and are at the whim of air currents.
Threat - Chemical: Much simpler but less effective. Poisonous gas is packed into an explosive device and detonated in a crowded, enclosed area such as a shopping mall. Those exposed immediately carry the chemical with them if they try to get in a car or bus to go for help.
Technical problems: The whims of air currents and the half-life of the toxin. A stiff breeze can dilute the toxicity of a poison gas.
Threat - Nuclear: Most terrorism experts believe an attack using nuclear weapons is unlikely because they remain difficult to build or obtain. The bigger worry is radiological terrorism, in which attackers would, for example, take over a nuclear power plant and trigger a meltdown of its reactor core.
Technical problems: Security is substantial at most U.S. nuclear facilities, all of which are on high alert. Also, the dispersal of radiation would vary with weather patterns.

Graphic

 
GRAPHIC, B/W, Julie Snider, USA TODAY, Source: Research by Anita Manning (BAR GRAPH); GRAPHIC, B/W, USA TODAY, Source: USA TODAY research (ILLUSTRATION)

Load-Date: September 24, 2001


End of Document