U.S. Officials Clash at Hearing On Power to Seize Fugitives
The New York Times
November 9, 1989, Thursday, Late Edition - Final


Copyright 1989 The New York Times Company
Section: Section A; Page 10, Column 3; Foreign Desk
Length: 501 words
Byline: By NEIL A. LEWIS, Special to The New York Times
Dateline: WASHINGTON, Nov. 8
Body


A Bush Administration official and a Democratic Congressman clashed today over a recently disclosed Justice Department memorandum that says the President may order the seizure of fugitives in foreign countries without the host governments' consent.
Assistant Attorney General William P. Barr defended his June 21 memorandum at a Congressional hearing in which he said the President had the authority to order the Federal Bureau of Investigation to make such arrests, even though they might violate international law.
The memorandum, which has not been made public, amended a 1980 legal opinion written during the Carter Administration that said such arrests could not be made without the approval of the foreign government.
''Kidnapping a suspect would make the U.S. into an international outlaw,'' said Don Edwards, a California Democrat and chairman of the Judiciary subcommittee that held the hearing today. ''How can we expect other nations to respect our law if we don't respect theirs?''
 
'Increase in Narco-Terrorism'
Mr. Edwards said that if the United States acted to seize people without the host countries' permission, wouldn't it lend support for the Governments of Iran, Panama and Nicaragua ''to do the same thing?''
Mr. Barr responded, ''I reject any notion of moral equivalency between the United States and outlaw countries.''
The new memorandum was written by Mr. Barr after a request from the F.B.I., which has become increasingly involved in international terrorism investigations. Mr. Barr said the Constitution and court rulings allow the President to ''depart from international law'' in behalf of the national interest. He insisted, nonetheless, that the memorandum did not represent a change in policy that he defined as trying to work closely with other governments.
But he said the United States was facing ''an increase in terrorism and an increase in narco-terrorism.'' He continued, ''There are still lawless countries in the world that sponsor terrorism that is directed against the United States.''
Although he said there were no current plans to use the broader seizure authority, he gave an example of the circumstances in which it would be considered.
 
Hazards of Attempts at Seizure
''If we find a terrorist, for example, who blows an American 747 out of the sky, if we find him basking in some safe haven enjoying the payoff he received for blowing Americans out of the sky,'' he said.
Abraham D. Sofaer, the State Department legal adviser, largely concurred in his testimony with Mr. Barr, but sounded several cautionary notes. Mr. Sofaer said that ''we need to consider the fact that our legal position may be seized upon by other nations to engage in irresponsible conduct against our interests.''
He said efforts to seize fugitives without permission of the host government could result in the arrest or death of the American agents and damage bilateral relations.
The existence of the memorandum apparently caught President Bush and Secretary of State James A. Baker 3d by surprise.


End of Document