U.S. CRITICIZED ON HUMAN RIGHTS;
 GROUP: IGNORING ALLIES' FLAWS HURTS TERROR FIGHT
Pittsburgh Post-Gazette (Pennsylvania)
January 15, 2003 Wednesday
SOONER EDITION


Copyright 2003 P.G. Publishing Co.
Section: NATIONAL,
Length: 618 words
Byline: JOHN BYRNE, MCCLATCHY NEWSPAPERS
Dateline: WASHINGTON
Body


The United States is undermining its own efforts to quell terrorism by neglecting human rights standards abroad, an international human rights group said yesterday.
 In its annual report, the non-governmental lobbying group Human Rights Watch declared that the United States is discouraging popular support for its anti-terrorism campaign by supporting allies with questionable human rights records.
 "Washington's tendency to ignore human rights in fighting terrorism is not only disturbing in its own right; it is dangerously counterproductive," the organization said. "The smoldering resentment it breeds risks generating terrorist recruits, puts off potential anti-terrorism allies, and weakens efforts to curb terrorist atrocities."
The 58-country report spotlighted U.S. alliances with countries such as Israel, Pakistan and Russia that have pursued virulent anti-terror campaigns. It also chided tactics used by the United States in detaining prisoners from Afghanistan in Guantanamo Bay, Cuba.
 "The United States is far from the world's worst human rights abuser," said Kenneth Roth, executive director of Human Rights Watch. "But Washington has so much power today that when it flouts human rights standards, it damages the human rights cause worldwide."
 The U.S. government issues its own human rights assessment annually through the State Department, reporting on every country except the United States itself. Administration officials say they're proud of their record.
 "Democracy has been a hallmark of our policy around the world, we have made very clear in the war on terrorism," said State Department spokesman Richard Boucher. "In the Middle East, the secretary of state has made quite clear that our goal is to support the efforts to reform, support the calls by Arab leaders and Arab scholars for reform and more openness in the Arab world. We're going to put money behind that."
 Human Rights Watch Washington advocacy director Tom Malinowski emphasized that the U.S. human rights record isn't entirely sour. In Egypt, for instance, the Bush administration protested the detention of a leading dissident by threatening to freeze foreign aid.
 "This is the first time the U.S. has even linked aid to a Middle Eastern country to its human rights record," Malinowski said, noting the United States pushed former Soviet states of Uzbekistan and Turkmenistan to embrace political reform.
 Yet Malinowski believes the Bush administration can do much more to solidify its human rights position.
 "We think the U.S. message should continually be that there's no contradiction between fighting terrorism and supporting human rights, that they're in fact mutually reinforcing," he said. "They've tried in a couple of places to add substance to those words, but there's still a temptation in many countries to forget about the rhetoric and do what's expedient."
 The organization challenged U.S. alliances with Pakistan and Saudi Arabia, countries that Human Rights Watch charges have weak judicial systems and employ heavy-handed police measures, like torture, to coerce confessions. In Pakistan, they noted, thousands of suspected Islamic militants were rounded up with scant evidence of individual culpability -- to which the United States and its European allies offered no resistance.
 The report also questioned U.S. support for Israel and Russia, which they say have used an anti-terrorism pose to "cloak or intensify repression aimed at separatist, dissident, or nationalist movements that are themselves often abusive."
 "To fight terrorism, you need the support of people in countries where the terrorists live," said Roth. "Cozying up to oppressive governments is hardly a way to build those alliances."

Load-Date: January 16, 2003


End of Document