U.S. worried about targets near Sochi; Games themselves are secure, terror official testifies
USA TODAY
January 30, 2014 Thursday
FINAL EDITION


Copyright 2014 Gannett Company, Inc. All Rights Reserved
Section: NEWS; Pg. 2A
Length: 532 words
Byline: Aamer Madhani, USA TODAY
Body


A top U.S. counterterrorism official told a Senate panel Wednesday that he's concerned that terrorists may try to strike soft targets on the outskirts of the Sochi Winter Olympics.
National Counterterrorism Center Director Matthew Olsen told the Senate Intelligence Committee he is confident that Russian officials preparing for the Olympics are "very focused" and are "devoting substantial resources" to keeping the Games safe.
"The biggest issue from my perspective is not the Games themselves, the venues themselves," Olsen said. "There is extensive security at those locations, the sites of the events. The greater threat is to softer targets in the greater Sochi area, in the outskirts beyond Sochi, where there is a substantial potential for a terrorist attack."
"We are very focused on the Sochi Olympics and we have seen an uptick in threat reporting regarding Sochi, and this is what we expected given where the Olympics are located," added Olsen, who traveled to Russia last year to consult with officials about the Games. "There are a number of extremists in that area."
The specter of terrorism has long shrouded the Sochi Winter Games because of the host city's proximity to a hotbed of Islamic extremist activity in the North Caucasus region. And the terrorism fears have intensified in the past month after suicide bombing attacks in the city of Volgograd left more than 30 people dead, nearly 500 miles from Sochi.
Chechen separatist leader Doku Umarov has called on followers to disrupt the Olympic Games.
Late last week, the U.S. Olympic Committee sent a memo to the contingent of 230 American athletes advising them not to display identifying clothing or colors outside of secure, accredited areas.
U.S. authorities had expressed frustration after learning only through media reports of the Russian government's recent dragnet in the Sochi area for possible terrorism suspects, including a suspected female suicide bomber.
FBI Director James Comey, who testified at Wednesday's hearing, said cooperation between the FBI and the Russian FSB on security issues surrounding the Olympics, which run Feb. 7-23, has been "steadily improving" as the Games approach.
"We have a good level of cooperation there," Comey said. "It can always improve. We are looking for ways to improve it, as are they."
Meanwhile, in Russia, the Games' organizing committee chief, Dmitry Chernyshenko, said Wednesday that Sochi is "fully ready" and will deliver safe, friendly and well-run Games that defy the grim reports that have overshadowed preparations, the Associated Press reported.
Chernyshenko said the city is the "most secure venue at the moment on the planet" and promised that tight security measures will not detract from the atmosphere of the Games.
Nevertheless, U.S. lawmakers have expressed grave concerns about the Sochi Olympics, even as the Russians announced plans to deploy more than 50,000 police officers and soldiers to beef up security.
On CBS' Face the Nation on Sunday, Rep. Mike McCaul, R-Texas and chairman of the House Homeland Security Committee, called the security threat "the greatest I think I've ever seen because of the proximity of the terrorists to the Olympic village." 

Graphic

 
photo David Goldman, AP

Load-Date: January 30, 2014


End of Document