U.S. Attorney says battling financial fraud, terrorism are among top priorities
The Bakersfield Californian
April 14, 2010 Wednesday


Copyright 2010 The Bakersfield Californian
Distributed by McClatchy-Tribune Business News
Section: STATE AND REGIONAL NEWS
Length: 358 words
Byline: Jason Kotowski, The Bakersfield Californian
Body


Apr. 14--Prosecuting mortgage fraud and anti-terrorism efforts are among the top priorities of recently appointed U.S. Attorney for the Eastern District of California Benjamin B. Wagner.
Wagner talked with local law enforcement and media in separate meetings Wednesday morning regarding his goals for the district, and Kern County in particular. He said stepping up efforts in financial fraud enforcement, which Bakersfield has seen its share of, is one of his plans.
"There are a lot of active cases in Bakersfield, and there will be more," Wagner said.
He said he couldn't talk about specifics of the ongoing Crisp & Cole case, in which several people have pleaded guilty to crimes in a fraud investigation, but he said mortgage fraud is a huge problem. FBI and IRS agents raided 13 local sites associated with Crisp, Cole & Associates in 2007.
Wagner also addressed his office's policy toward medical marijuana dispensaries, an issue he said where there appears to be a lot of public misunderstanding. He said, regardless of state law, his office will continue to target dispensaries.
"Selling marijuana is illegal, period," Wagner said.
He said his office will use discretion in prosecuting people who have "personal use" amounts of marijuana and who carry medical marijuana identification cards, but that doesn't mean there won't be times where they do prosecute individuals.
Kern and other nearby counties are some of the fastest growing places in the state, but federal resources haven't kept pace with the rapid growth, Wagner said. He said he hopes to increase funding in Bakersfield and eventually even establish an office in the city.
"I'm going to try to expand federal resources as much as budgets allow," Wagner said.
To see more of The Bakersfield Californian, or to subscribe to the newspaper, go to http://www.bakersfield.com. Copyright (c) 2010, The Bakersfield Californian Distributed by McClatchy-Tribune Information Services. For reprints, email tmsreprints@permissionsgroup.com, call 800-374-7985 or 847-635-6550, send a fax to 847-635-6968, or write to The Permissions Group Inc., 1247 Milwaukee Ave., Suite 303, Glenview, IL 60025, USA.

Load-Date: April 15, 2010


End of Document