U.S. vows to retaliate for bombings bombings bombings
$%Charleston Gazette (West Virginia) virginia) virginia)
August 10, 1998, Monday monday monday


Copyright 1998 Charleston Newspapers newspapers newspapers
Section: News; Pg. P1A P1A P1A
Length: 712 words
Byline: Laura Myers myers myers
Body


WASHINGTON (AP) - Senior U.S. officials promised Sunday to track down
those who committed the "unadulterated evil" of blowing up two
American embassies in East Africa - and to strike back if the attacks
were sponsored by a government.
The Clinton administration, which ordered embassies worldwide on high
alert after Friday's blasts that killed 12 Americans, also plans to
consider increasing security at older U.S. missions to protect
diplomats better in an era of global terrorism.
"We respond and retaliate as swiftly as possible to those states who
have sponsored the terrorism," Defense Secretary William Cohen
declared. "We saw that with Moammar Gadhafi in Libya." libya." libya."
The United States bombed two Libyan cities because of evidence that
Gadhafi's government, which the State Department lists as a sponsor of
terrorism, participated in the bombing of a Berlin discotheque in
1986. The blast killed two American soldiers and a Turkish woman.
While U.S. officials refused to speculate on who might be responsible
for the almost simultaneous explosions in the Kenyan capital of
Nairobi and Tanzania's capital, Dar es Salaam, they said the attacks
appeared to be perpetrated by a highly trained and organized terrorist
organization or group.
Cohen called the twin attacks well-coordinated, "long in the
planning."
"It was not the act of some isolated individual, a madman," he said
on ABC's "This Week with Sam Donaldson and Cokie Roberts."
Sandy Berger, President Clinton's national security adviser, said
several hundred U.S. investigators, including more than 100 FBI
agents, are seeking out clues at the sites in Africa and elsewhere. He
and other U.S. officials refused to reveal specific information.
"It's an act of unadulterated evil," Berger said on CBS' "Face the
Nation." "And we will pursue every lead that we have until we have
tracked these people down and held them accountable."
Secretary of State Madeleine Albright pleaded for Americans to have
patience with the investigation. Like Cohen, she suggested the U.S.
government would retaliate if necessary.
The bombings killed more than 200 people and injured thousands. Among
the dead was Jay Bartley, a 20-year-old university student from San
Diego, and his father, Consul General Julian Bartley, 55, the last of
12 Americans confirmed dead. Their bodies are to be flown home at
midweek, Albright said.
Bartley's daughter, Edith, wearing black and appearing composed as she
read a statement outside the State Department, expressed pride in her
father's 24 years of diplomatic service, including in the Dominican
Republic, Colombia, Spain, Israel, Korea and finally in Kenya. She
also asked for privacy for her family.
"This is a very difficult time," said Bartley, a third-year law
student at the University of Missouri. "On behalf of my family, I
would like to extend my deepest and heartfelt condolences to all
family members worldwide who lost a loved one or were affected by the
horrific bombings."
Exiled Saudi militant Osama bin Laden is considered a possible suspect
in the bombings. He has threatened holy war by Islamic fighters
against U.S. troops in Saudi Arabia and Americans elsewhere. Albright
acknowledged he's being looked at by investigators.
"Clearly he is someone that has been involved in sponsoring terrorism
and has made speeches in which he has basically been very
anti-America," she said, refusing to comment further. State
Department investigators also are assessing claims of responsibility
from previously unheard-of organizations.
The State Department lists Syria, Sudan, Libya, Iran, Iraq, North
Korea and Cuba as sponsors of terrorism.
Sen. Orrin Hatch, R-Utah, agreed and questioned the U.S. policy
against assassinating terrorists.
"These acts of terror really are acts of war," Hatch said on ABC.
"There should be nothing that should not be on the table when it comes
to protecting our citizens overseas."
The embassies in Nairobi and Dar es Salaam had tight security but
didn't meet stricter standards put into effect in 1986 after a series
of terrorist attacks on U.S. missions and military installations
overseas.
Albright and Berger said the administration would likely ask Congress
to approve new money to bring more of the 280 U.S. missions and
embassies around the world to higher security standards.  standards.  standards.

Load-Date: August 11, 1998


End of Document