U.S. vigil on terror continues;
 Postal Service on alert against bombs; suspects allegedly have ties to sponsors of violence.
The Atlanta Journal and Constitution
December 24, 1999, Friday,
Home Edition


Copyright 1999 The Atlanta Constitution
Section: News; Pg. 1A
Length: 1173 words
Byline: Arthur Brice, Staff
Body

American preoccupation with possible terrorist attacks intensified Thursday with an FBI warning that mail bombs might be posted from Germany and reports that a woman arrested recently at the Vermont border with Canada has ties to Algerian terrorists.
Airports and the U.S. Postal Service immediately took precautions against letter bombs, including the use of X-ray machines on incoming mail. In Germany, Frankfurt's airport --- Europe's busiest hub --- stepped up security at its huge postal center.
"Out of an abundance of caution, the public is being promptly alerted to this information," a statement from the Federal Bureau of Investigation said. "Questionable packages should not be handled and local authorities should be notified."
AJC
In federal court in Burlington, Vt., meanwhile, prosecutors argued successfully that Lucia Garofalo and Bouabide Chamchi should be kept in jail. They were arrested Sunday at a remote U.S.-Cana- dian border crossing in northeastern Vermont.
Court documents linked Garofalo's cell phone and the car she was driving to a member of the Algerian Islamic League, whose leader is said to be connected to "organizations sponsoring a number of terrorist acts in Europe and Algeria. "
In other developments Thursday:
Defense Secretary William Cohen told reporters in Kosovo, the Yugoslav province, that U.S. forces have been put on a general alert. "We will continue to have force protection of a top priority for all our bases and facilities. We're just being much more cautious because of some general threats that we've had and discovered."
Energy Secretary Bill Richardson said the Energy Department was ready for any terrorism related to New Year's celebrations. "We are taking extra security precautions at energy installations," said Richardson, conceding there are "some terrorism concerns," although no specific threats have been received.
NBC News reported that federal officials believe terrorists have targeted the New Year's Eve celebration in Times Square in New York, the celebration on the Washington Mall that is to feature President and Mrs. Clinton and a fireworks show and street party near Seattle's Space Needle. Citing anonymous federal authorities, NBC said that officials are working off unconfirmed intelligence reports that a 32-year-old Algerian indicted in Seattle on explosives charges is linked to a band of terrorism suspects working out of Montreal.
Federal authorities charged a New Jersey man with threatening to leave a bomb-laden van in a tunnel used by thousands of commuters to reach New York City. Searches conducted at the home of Renato DeSousa Flor, 22, after his arrest Wednesday revealed no evidence that he intended to carry out the threat posted in an Internet chat room, federal authorities said. Still, security was increased at the Lincoln and Holland tunnels, which link New Jersey and Manhattan under the Hudson River. Flor's lawyer said the posting, which said "F.B.I. and C.I.A. BEWARE," was done on a dare.
Sen. Richard Shelby (R-Ala.), chairman of the Senate Intelligence Committee, warned that a U.S. military attack "would be in order" if any terrorist group makes the "terrible mistake" of attacking Americans.
U.S. officials have issued several warnings of possible attacks on Americans overseas, but the threat of domestic terrorism became a visible reality Dec. 14 when Ahmed Ressam was arrested in Port Angeles, Wash., after bomb-making materials were found in his car.
The Royal Canadian Mounted Police on Thursday raided a Montreal apartment where Ressam was believed to have once lived. Cpl. Leo Monbourquette, RCMP spokesman, said no explosives were found.
Ressam was indicted in Seattle and pleaded innocent Wednesday to charges he made false statements to U.S. Customs officers, smuggled nitroglycerin across the border, transported explosives, committed a felony while carrying explosives, and possessed unregistered firearms --- the apparent timing devices found in his car.
The Associated Press reported Thursday that the Canadian Security and Intelligence Service has told U.S. officials that Ressam was trained earlier this decade in Afghanistan. The New York Times published similar allegations earlier this week.
On Sunday, U.S. Border Patrol officers arrested Chamchi, a 20-year-old Algerian man, crossing into the United States with a falsified French passport at a remote border station at Beecher Falls, Vt. Garofalo, a 35-year- old Canadian woman, was arrested with him.
Dogs sniffed traces of what may have been explosives in their car, but no bomb-making materials were found, federal agents said.
At Thursday's hearing, Chamchi was ordered held without bail due to the risk he might flee. Garofalo, accused of attempting to transport an illegal immigrant into the country, is being held without bail at least until her hearing resumes Dec. 30.
Charles Tetzlaff, the U.S. attorney in Vermont, said he knows of no connection between the Vermont and Washington cases.
Prosecutors said in court papers that Garofalo's cellular phone account and the car she was driving Sunday were registered to Brahim Mahdi, described as a member of the Algerian Islamic League. The account later was transferred to her name.
The group's leader, identified as Mourad Dhina, is believed to be connected to "organizations sponsoring a number of terrorist acts in Europe and Algeria, " according to information from American intelligence sources that prosecutors did not identify.
Prosecutors said U.S. and Canadian authorities are investigating calls made in 1992 to Garofalo's Montreal phone from a phone "reportedly associated with a person under investigation for the theft and sale of dynamite stolen in Ontario."
Mahdi, 34, denied any connection to terrorism and told the AP in an interview from his Montreal home that he had never heard of the Algerian Islamic League.
He said Garofalo was a friend and that he knew of no links between her and terrorism. Mahdi said he registered the car in his name because she has bad credit.
Dhina, reached by the AP in Geneva, said he founded the Algerian Islamic League as a cultural association but that it had not existed for about five years. He said he doesn't know either Garofalo or Chamchi and described the allegations as "completely surreal."
Prosecutors' documents said the 38-year-old Dhina, a physicist who graduated from the Massachusetts Institute of Technology, "has been identified from other sources of information as an Algerian international arms dealer who resides in Switzerland and is connected to organizations sponsoring a number of terrorist acts in Europe and Algeria. Dhina is reported to be actively involved in the shipment of arms to terrorist organizations."
Despite concerns over foreign terrorists, FBI analysts have concluded that the most likely sources of year-end terrorism are home-grown hate groups and religious cults such as Aryan Nations and Christian Identity.
Officials also are concerned that a religious cult might seek a "fiery ending in an apocalyptic battle" with law enforcement.

Load-Date: December 24, 1999


End of Document