U.S. policy invites terrorism
University Wire
September 17, 1998


Copyright 1998 College Heights Herald via U-Wire
Length: 449 words
Byline: By Derek Durbin, College Heights Herald
Dateline: Bowling Green, Ky.
Body


What should the United States government do to stop the threat of terrorism toward Americans around the world?
 It sounds like a complex question, doesn't it? What could possibly be the best tactic in stopping this outward hatred for American citizens?
 Should we shoot more missiles? Send in crack assassination teams to take out the leaders of terrorist groups? No, probably not.
Western Kentucky U.
What then can the government do to arrest hatred for its citizens?
 Actually this is not at all a complex or difficult question to answer.
 The first element that must be looked at is exactly how many Americans abroad are under the greatest threat.
 All of them.
 If not now, they soon will be.
 Why? The U.S. government has pushed its nose too deep into the affairs of other countries. The government has manipulated too many people around the world with the presence of not only military forces, but also innocent American citizens.
 In 1997 the U.S. Army's public affairs office noted there are more than 100 countries in the whole world where there exists a military presence. With only 197 nations in the world, this means more than half of the world is under American influence directly, and the rest of the nations under indirect influence, in the form of American foreign trade practices.
 If you wonder why the countries of the world despise us, it's because we are seen as a threat to their cultural lives and the growth of their civilization.
 Much like foreign missionaries enter a place and change the culture of the natives, the U. S. government tries to alter other cultures, sometimes subtly, sometimes blatantly, to fit ours. It is, after all, a natural process of imperialism.
 And imperialism is what it has become.
 The United States is trying to control the majority of the world's natural growth, something seen as a threat.
 There is a jihad against America. And rightly so.
 The government is a satanic figure in the eyes of most foreign countries trying to preserve their own way of life. It's an imposing figure trying to gain cultural control over the world. The current foreign policy is the government's bible, and both military and innocent civilian lives are its pawns.
 We may not be trying to use the conventional weapons of war to control the world, but undoubtedly we have overstepped our boundaries in other ways.
 The United States should recognize we are not wanted. And as long as the government insists on our presence around the world, American citizens will remain the innocent victims of a corrupt foreign policy.
 Derek R. Durbin is a senior English major from Bowling Green.
(C) 1999 College Heights Herald via U-WIRE

Load-Date: February 8, 1999


End of Document