U.S. AIMS TO END SAUDI TERRORISM FINANCING
Pittsburgh Post-Gazette (Pennsylvania)
November 26, 2002 Tuesday
SOONER EDITION


Copyright 2002 P.G. Publishing Co.
Section: NATIONAL,
Length: 707 words
Byline: DOUGLAS FARAH, THE WASHINGTON POST
Dateline: WASHINGTON
Body


A National Security Council task force is recommending an action plan to President Bush that is designed to force Saudi Arabia to crack down on terrorist financiers within 90 days or face unilateral U.S. action to bring the suspects to justice, senior U.S. officials said yesterday.
 The interagency plan, devised before the recent furor over allegations of Saudi involvement in terror financing, comes amid growing concern among some congressional leaders and U.S. allies that the administration has been unwilling to press Saudi Arabia for action for fear of alienating a key Arab ally as possible war with Iraq looms.
 The officials would not say what unilateral U.S. action might entail. But they said the United States would first present the Saudis with intelligence and evidence against individuals and businesses suspected of financing al-Qaida and other terrorist groups, coupled with a demand that they be put out of business. In return, one senior official said, the administration will say, "We don't care how you deal with the problem; just do it or we will" after 90 days.
How demands would be presented to the Saudis is still under debate. They range from sending a high-profile Cabinet official to Riyadh to issuing a formal dimarche to the Saudi government through the ambassador, the officials said. The officials stressed that the goal was to cut off funds before another terror attack can occur, and said they would press the Saudis to act even if there was not enough information to convict someone in a court of law.
 U.S. intelligence agencies and financial investigators have put together a classified, working list of nine wealthy individuals believed to be the core group of financiers for al-Qaida and other radical Islamic terror groups, U.S. officials said. Of those, seven are Saudis, one is a Pakistani merchant and one is an Egyptian businessman. The officials would not identify the individuals.
 "There are some who argue that sharing intelligence with the Saudis is just plain stupid," one official said. "But in so doing we put down a marker. We are saying we are not acting unilaterally, we are not moving precipitously, we are not acting as a hostile force.
 "We tell them the problem and leave it to them to solve, presuming they will act in good faith. But if they do not act in 90 days, we assume solving the problem is beyond their ken, and the United States will solve it."
 News of the decision to confront the Saudis follows a weekend of news reports that a charitable contribution by Princess Haifa al-Faisal, the wife of the Saudi ambassador to the United States, may have indirectly benefited two of the men who participated in the Sept. 11, 2001, terror attacks.
 The reports prompted criticism of Saudi Arabia among lawmakers, including Sen. Richard C. Shelby, R-Ala, who said the Saudis had "a lot of answering to do" in their efforts to cut off terrorist financing.
 The Saudis say, however, that they have been cooperating in the war on terror financing and have not been presented with solid evidence on some targets of the proposed U.S. crackdown.
 Saudi Interior Minister Prince Nayef yesterday called the allegations of Saudi officials' funding terrorism "baseless fabrications."
 A senior Saudi official said his government had received no indication that a high-level envoy was set to deliver evidence and demand action. He said he did not understand why U.S. officials were "spewing these outrageous comments to the press" when the two nations were working closely together, hampered mostly by an unwieldy U.S. bureaucracy in which one counterterrorism office often seems not to know what the other offices do.
 White House spokesman Ari Fleischer yesterday called Saudi Arabia a "good partner in the war on terrorism." But he said the United States would continue to press Saudi Arabia and other countries to "do more in the fight against terrorism" on the financial, diplomatic and political fronts.
 Secretary of State Colin L. Powell, speaking to reporters on his plane as he headed to a conference in Mexico City, said, "I think it unlikely that Princess Haifa and [Saudi Ambassador] Prince Bandar [bin Sultan] would do anything knowingly to support anybody connected to terrorist activity."

Load-Date: November 26, 2002


End of Document