U.S. BEARS SOME BLAME FOR ATTACK ON COLE, YEMENI OFFICIAL SAYS
 The Philadelphia Inquirer
DECEMBER 5, 2000 Tuesday SF EDITION


Copyright 2000 Philadelphia Newspapers, LLC  All Rights Reserved


Section: NATIONAL; Pg. A08
Length: 431 words
Byline: ASSOCIATED PRESS
Dateline: SAN'A, Yemen
Body


The United States itself bears some responsibility for the attack on the USS Cole because it helped create the terrorists who now consider America their worst enemy, Yemen's foreign minister said yesterday.
Abdulkader Bajammal said in an interview that "the operation was not Yemeni, not pure Yemeni. It is a network involving so many countries. Terrorism has no nation."
No one has been charged in the Oct. 12 bombing of the Cole, which killed 17 sailors and wounded 39. Asked whether any indictments were forthcoming, Bajammal said he had no information.
But he said that if any Yemenis were found to have been involved, they may have simply been corrupt bureaucrats who provided logistical help in exchange for money, not out of ideology.
"We are a victim of terrorism, not a source of terrorism," he said.
The attack on the Cole followed anti-U.S. and anti-Israeli demonstrations in Yemen and across an Arab world enraged by violence in Palestinian areas.
But the roots of anti-American terrorism are older and deeper, extending back to the 1980s, when one of the last-gasp Cold War battles was waged in the rugged mountains and valleys of Afghanistan.
Bajammal said that because the investigation was continuing, he could not comment on the possibility that Yemeni or other Arab veterans of the Afghan war were involved in the Cole attack.
But, he said: "Terrorism did not appear by accident. It is a historical phenomenon. Just as the Soviet Union created a man like [the international terrorist] Carlos, the other side created the Afghan Arabs. We have inherited the remnants of the Cold War."
In Washington, a senior U.S. official who spoke on condition of anonymity said the Clinton administration rejected any suggestion that the United States was somehow responsible for the Cole attack.
Yemen, whose central government is struggling to expand authority over tribal areas, has long been a haven for Muslim extremists, including groups linked to Saudi dissident Osama bin Laden, a veteran of the Afghan war.
Bin Laden was one of the thousands of fighters from across the Arab world who went to Afghanistan after the 1979 Soviet incursion to fight alongside Afghan guerrillas, whose chief financial and military backers included the United States.
After the Soviets withdrew in 1989, many of the Arab fighters turned their anger against the United States, which they see as a threat to Islam and to Arab independence.
The United States and Yemen signed an accord last week calling for cooperation between U.S. and Yemeni investigators trying to determine who was behind the bombing of the Cole.

Load-Date: February 5, 2002


End of Document