U.S. WILL ASK ALLIES TO HELP ISOLATE IRAN
St. Louis Post-Dispatch (Missouri)
May 27, 1993, THURSDAY, FIVE STAR Edition


Copyright 1993 St. Louis Post-Dispatch, Inc.
Section: NEWS; Pg. 21A
Length: 490 words
Dateline: WASHINGTON
Body


President Bill Clinton's administration is preparing a broad new effort to weaken Iran by persuading reluctant allies to cut off loans, investment and arms sales to what American officials regard as a permanently hostile government.  The plan, drafted as part of an intensive policy review, reflects a conclusion that Iran must be isolated if it is to be prevented from emerging as a substantial threat to Western interests. Thus, the plan rejects policies of previous administrations that offered to reward Iran for good behavior.  Administration officials said the new approach aimed at denying Iran access to the money and weapons needed to complete a military resurgence. They said it was based on a decision that the United States and its allies should now treat Iran as harshly as it treats Iraq.  For much of the 1980s, the United States sought to play Iran and Iraq against one another. But with U.N. sanctions imposed on Iraq since the end of the Persian Gulf War, the administration has concluded that the wiser policy is "dual containment." Secretary of State Warren Christopher hinted at the emerging shift earlier this year by denouncing Iran as an "international outlaw" and a "dangerous country" for its support of terrorism and its pursuit of nuclear weapons.  But the new policy is far more sweeping than Christopher indicated when he said the United States would seek to block loans to Iran by international organizations.  Administration officials say the isolation of Iran should end only if Iran halts its support for terrorism, curtails its military buildup, stops its subversion of other governments and ends its quest for nuclear weapons.
Among the antagonistic activities that U.S. officials attribute to Iran is active support for efforts by the Hamas and Party of God organizations to use violence to disrupt the Mideast peace talks. The officials say Iran has also helped establish terrorist training camps in Lebanon and Sudan, and has assisted groups trying to overthrow the governments of Egypt, Algeria and Tunisia.  The United States already subjects Iran to stiff sanctions that ban military and most commercial ties. Administration officials said their new policy could succeed only if other countries could be persuaded to change course.  Among the top priorities, administration officials said, are efforts to persuade Russia and China to cancel deals to provide Iran with weapons and nuclear reactors, and to persuade Japan, Germany and Britain to cut off loans.  None of those countries have shown any willingness to sever such lucrative ties, and Japan in particular has argued that commercial links can encourage moderates inside Iran.  While many deals between U.S. companies and Iran are already prohibited, the new policy would almost certainly lead the administration to reject a request by the Boeing Co. to sell 20 Boeing 737 jetliners to Iran, a deal worth more than $750 million, officials say.

Load-Date: October 7, 1993


End of Document