U.S. MINE FIRM ACQUITTED IN POLLUTION CASE 
Pittsburgh Post-Gazette (Pennsylvania)
April 25, 2007 Wednesday
SOONER EDITION


Copyright 2007 P.G. Publishing Co.
Section: WORLD; WORLD BRIEFS; Pg. A-4
Length: 548 words
Body


MANADO, Indonesia -- An Indonesian court acquitted Newmont Mining Corp., the U.S. mining giant, and one of its senior executives yesterday of charges of polluting a bay with toxic waste from a defunct gold mine, in a case that became a litmus test of foreign investor confidence in Indonesia.
Ending a 21-month trial that pitted an emboldened national environmental lobby against Newmont Mining, a panel of judges found there was no evidence to support criminal charges that the company had polluted Buyat Bay, off the island of Sulawesi, with toxins including arsenic and mercury.
Prosecutors had asked the court to impose a three-year jail term and a $55,000 fine on Richard B. Ness, chief of the Newmont unit that controls the mine, who is a U.S. citizen. They had also sought a $110,000 fine against the company.
But the chief judge, Ridwan Damanik, told the Manado District Court that the case, which followed a lengthy police investigation and the monthlong detention of five Newmont executives, including an American and an Australian, should never have resulted in criminal proceedings.
Refugees plead for help
EL-GENEINA, Sudan -- Refugee leaders pleaded with the visiting U.N. refugee chief yesterday for better security as he toured camps around this increasingly lawless regional capital, where feared janjaweed militiamen roam freely and have infiltrated the police forces.
The fighters, blamed for widespread atrocities in Darfur, rode with police and army units in armed pickup trucks through el-Geneina as U.N. High Commissioner for Refugees Antonio Guterres met with local authorities.
Gunshots and clashes from the janjaweed occur almost daily, residents say. "The last killing happened five days ago," said Ibrahim Harun. "A janjaweed killed my neighbor because he wanted his cell phone."
Terror suspects arrested
LONDON -- British anti-terrorist police yesterday arrested an outspoken Islamic activist and five others accused of raising funds for terrorism and inciting others to commit terrorist acts overseas.
The activist, Abu Izzadeen, already faces charges of encouraging terrorism following a speech last year in which he allegedly praised the suicide bombers behind the July 7, 2005, London transit attacks that killed 52 commuters.
Police said the six, who range in age from 21 to 35, were being held under the Terrorism Act.
Police said they were still conducting searches.
Bombs rock Somali capital
MOGADISHU, Somalia -- Car bombs exploded in Somalia's capital yesterday and fighting raged for a seventh straight day, with Ethiopian and Somali government troops making a final push to wipe out an insurgency ahead of a peace conference.
Several large shipments of food for the tens of thousands of people who have fled Mogadishu have been turned back because there was no clearance from the Somali government, aid workers and diplomats said.
China targets secrecy
BEIJING -- China announced new regulations yesterday to reduce government secrecy and grant citizens greater access to official information, but the regulations include broad exceptions that raise questions about how much new openness will be tolerated.
The regulations, approved in a decree signed by Prime Minister Wen Jiabao, were announced with fanfare yesterday but will not become effective until May 1, 2008.

Load-Date: April 25, 2007


End of Document