U.S., Cuba see progress on thawing relations; Havana hopes to be off terrorism blacklist within weeks
The Tampa Tribune (Florida)
February 28, 2015 Saturday


Copyright 2015 Times Publishing Company All Rights Reserved
Section: NATION & WORLD; NationWorld; Pg. 5
Length: 347 words
Byline: BRADLEY KLAPPER

The Associated Press
Dateline: WASHINGTON 
Body


 - The United States and Cuba claimed progress Friday toward ending a half-century diplomatic freeze, suggesting they could clear some of the biggest obstacles to their new relationship within weeks.
After Friday's talks in Washington, the second round of U.S.-Cuban discussions in the last month, diplomats of both countries spoke positively about fulfilling the promise made by Presidents Barack Obama and Raul Castro in December to restore embassies in each other's capitals. 
The U.S. even held out hope of clinching a deal in time for April's summit of North and South American leaders, which Obama and Castro are expected to attend, however unlikely that appeared.
We made meaningful progress, Roberta Jacobson, the State Department's senior envoy to Latin America, told reporters, calling the talks open, honest and sometimes challenging but always respectful.  
Her Cuban counterpart, Josefina Vidal, indicated she received assurances that the U.S. would move on two of the biggest hurdles remaining: Cuba's inclusion on the U.S. state sponsor of terrorism blacklist and its inability to conduct normal banking operations in the United States. She expressed confidence of progress on both priorities within the following weeks.
Cuba's 33-year status on the terrorism list appeared the biggest hurdle, with Vidal saying the issue needed to be resolved if the Cold War foes were to improve ties. Washington is reviewing the designation, which stems from Havana's support decades ago for the Basque separatist group ETA and the Revolutionary Armed Forces of Colombia, Latin America's oldest and strongest rebel group. 
The U.S. has yet to make a decision, but all signs point to Cuba being taken off the list. 
Secretary of State John Kerry emphasized that the discussions on re-establishing embassies were distinct from the legal examination of Cuba's record on terrorism:
The state sponsorship of terrorism designation is ... not a negotiation. It is an evaluation that is made under a very strict set of requirements, congressionally mandated, and that has to be pursued separately.

Load-Date: February 28, 2015


End of Document