U.S. MONITORING OF LAWYERS, TERRORISM SUSPECTS CHALLENGED
Pittsburgh Post-Gazette (Pennsylvania)
May 9, 2002 Thursday
REGION EDITION


Copyright 2002 P.G. Publishing Co.
Section: NATIONAL,
Length: 311 words
Byline: STEVE FAINARU, THE WASHINGTON POST
Dateline: NEW YORK
Body


A man convicted in the deadly bombings of two U.S. embassies in Africa in 1998 filed the first federal lawsuit yesterday challenging a controversial rule that allows the Justice Department to eavesdrop on conversations between lawyers and inmates to prevent future acts of terrorism.
 The suit, filed in U.S. District Court in the District of Columbia, is on behalf of Mohamed Rashid Daoud Owhali, a Saudi national who hurled a stun grenade to distract guards in one of the simultaneous attacks.
It seeks to have the rule declared unconstitutional and bar future monitoring of attorney-client conversations without a judge's order.
 Owhali's lawyer, Frederic Cohn, said the Justice Department had not notified him that his communications with Owhali were being monitored, a requirement under the new rule. But he said Owhali was one of more than a dozen federal inmates eligible for monitoring, and the threat prevented him from speaking candidly with his client or adequately representing him.
 The suit opens a new front in the escalating battle between civil liberties advocates and the Justice Department over a series of extraordinary measures invoked since the Sept. 11 terrorist attacks.
 Previous cases have challenged the department's refusal to release the names of detainees, the constitutionality of closed immigration hearings and the use of the material witness statute to force people to testify before a grand jury.
 Attorney General John Ashcroft approved the new rule on an emergency basis in October.
 Until then, attorney-client communications in federal prisons had been exempt from monitoring.
 The rule allows the attorney general to order monitoring "for the purpose of deterring future acts that could result in death or serious bodily injury to persons."
 Last month, Ashcroft said "about a dozen and a half" federal inmates were subject to the new rule.

Load-Date: May 9, 2002


End of Document