U.S. deficit looms bigger than terrorism
Lincoln Journal Star (Nebraska)
March 23, 2005 Wednesday
City Edition


Copyright 2005 Lincoln Journal Star, All Rights Reserved
Section: B; Pg. 9
Length: 449 words
Body


The chorus complaining about Washington's fiscal follies is rising in volume.
  It's time for the Republicans who run the place to start listening.
  The latest voices to join the choir were members of the National Association for Business Economics.
  "NABE members, by a narrow margin, now believe that the federal deficit is a larger problem than terrorism" in the short run, said David Wyss, chief economist at Standard & Poor's.
  The budget deficit was ranked as the top threat by 27 percent of the business economists surveyed, compared with 24 percent who ranked terrorism No. 1.   Only seven months ago 40 percent of the organization's members ranked terrorism as the top threat.
  It's not like the business organization is a lone voice.
  U.S. Comptroller General David M. Walker earlier this month warned Congress that "continuing on this unsustainable path will gradually erode, if not suddenly damage, our economy, our standard of living and ultimately our national security."
  If spending continues to grow as fast as the economy and the recent tax cuts are extended, Walker said, the government will have only enough revenue by 2040 to pay interest on the money it has borrowed.
  If it weren't for money taken from taxpayers in the name of Social Security and used to pay for other federal programs, the federal deficit last year actually would have been $568 billion instead of $412 billion, Walker said.
  Walker reminded members of Congress of the true nature of the Treasury bonds in the so-called Social Security Trust Fund. "These aren't trust funds; these are accounting devices," said Walker, who heads the nonpartisan  Government Accountability Office.
  Republicans don't seem to be responding to the warnings, however.
  Even the staunchly conservative Washington Times noted in an editorial last week that "the governing party has had difficulty in enacting fiscal restraint worthy of the name."
  The newspaper also noted that the White House's five-year budget resolution failed to allocate funds to alleviate the alternative minimum tax, which is beginning to dig into the pockets of middle-class taxpayers.
  Originally enacted to close loopholes and make sure multimillionaires paid their fair share of income taxes, the tax, which is not adjusted for inflation, rapidly is hitting more Americans. By 2010, nearly 30 million taxpayers will be hit, according to The New York Times, including 94 percent of married filers who  have children and make $75,000 to $100,000.
  The Republicans who control the White House and both houses of Congress can't blame the dismal state of the nation's finances on anyone else. And the days when they could live off their reputation are over.

Load-Date: March 26, 2005


End of Document