U.S. can help resolve Pakistan-India conflict;
The anti-terrorism effort relies on these two nations.
Portland Press Herald (Maine)
December 27, 2001 Thursday, FINAL Edition


Copyright 2001 Blethen Maine Newspapers, Inc.
Section: EDITORIAL; Pg. 10A
Length: 407 words
Body


Even though India and Pakistan are literally half a world away, Americans ought to be deeply troubled by military escalations along the border. The United States can help reduce tensions in the region by acting as a neutral party hosting high-level negotiations between the two nations.
The India-Pakistan dispute is a long-standing regional issue that has included three wars and many other battles and skirmishes over the years. It has worldwide significance today because both countries are part of the nuclear fraternity, and keep their weapons on near-hair-trigger status.
After the Dec. 13 terrorist attack on India's parliament, which the government blames on Pakistan's intelligence service and its tolerance of radical fundamentalist groups, both countries have moved more men, munitions and missiles to the border.
Beyond the threat of a nuclear war, the United States has a special interest in maintaining peace between India and Pakistan. Both are crucial allies in the war on terrorism that we're now engaged in: India, as the world's largest democracy, is an important friend in the Middle East, while Pakistan, as a Muslim nation that quickly joined the anti-terror coalition, has helped the United States in its Afghanistan campaign against al-Qaida and the Taliban.
A war between these two countries, even limited to conventional weapons, would destabilize the entire region. Millions of civilians would find themselves in a battle zone, as would the thousands of American servicemen and women now stationed in Afghanistan, Pakistan and on ships sailing the Arabian Sea.
What should America do? First, it ought to continue to prod Pakistan to maintain its renunciation of terrorism, even when that terrorism may serve its short-term interests. Pakistan seems willing; in response to the Indian parliament attack, it has detained the leader of Jaish-e-Mohammed, a radical Islamist group, and frozen the assets of other terror organizations.
The United States should also work with India to seek solutions to the ongoing violence in Kashmir. This problem has proven as intractable as the Palestinian-Israel crisis, but it has not received the same intensive American assistance to resolve it.
This country cannot solve the many disputes between Pakistan and India by fiat, but it should commit itself to laying the diplomatic groundwork so that these two nations can solve their differences peacefully, rather than with guns and bombs.

Load-Date: December 28, 2001


End of Document