U.S.-ISRAELI TALKS TO STRESS ECONOMY
The New York Times
October 6, 1984, Saturday, Late City Final Edition


Copyright 1984 The New York Times Company
Section: Section 1; Page 4, Column 1; Foreign Desk
Length: 909 words
Byline: By BERNARD GWERTZMAN 
Dateline: WASHINGTON, Oct. 5
Body


The Reagan Administration plans to hold detailed talks next week with Prime Minister Shimon Peres and other senior Israeli officials on ways of dealing with serious problems in Israel's economy, a senior Administration official said today.
Mr. Peres, who became the head of a national unity Government last month, has already begun an austerity drive in Israel to bring down inflation, which is running at more than 400 percent a year. He has said Israel will look for long-term American help in its efforts toward economic recovery.
But before Mr. Peres's arrival on Monday for three days of talks that will include a White House meeting on Tuesday, Administration officials said today that there were no plans for any announcements of stepped-up American aid, beyond the $2.6 billion for the current fiscal year just approved by Congress.
This is because Secretary of State George P. Shultz, himself an economist, stressed to the Israelis in advance that until they had put a comprehensive economic plan into effect, there was no point in seeking increased aid. Mr. Peres, told of Washington's view, announced this week in Jerusalem that Israel would not seek any specific stopgap aid on his visit.
 
'Ready to Work Closely'
''The Israeli economy will be a principal issue and in that regard, our posture is that we are ready to work closely with Israeli leaders in their efforts to find effective, creative and enduring solutions to Israel's current economic problem,'' a senior Administration official told reporters today.
''We expect that the Prime Minister will be laying out for us his plans and his program in that regard,'' he said. ''And in the context of that program, we'll see how we can best be helpful.''
''We're going to be in a listening mode,'' he said, ''but a sympathetic listening mode, and we want to see how we can be most helpful in helping the Israeli Government put into effect its plan, its program.''
Among those who will meet with Mr. Peres are Treasury Secretary Donald T. Regan and Herbert Stein, a prominent economist who was President Nixon's chairman of the Council of Economic Advisers. Mr. Stein has for a year headed a special study group that has advised Mr. Shultz on the Israeli economy.
 
The Economy and Lebanon
The stress on economic issues at this meeting is unusual. In the past such sessions have been dominated by war and peace problems. The senior Administration official said the problems of Lebanon would be discussed, but he said the gaps among the Israeli and Lebanese and Syrian positions were so large that it did not appear practical for the United States to assume a mediating role as urged by Prime Minister Rashid Karami of Lebanon.
The Lebanese want indirect and not direct talks with Israel, while the Israelis want face-to-face sessions. There are also disagreements over the disposition of the Israeli-supported South Lebanon army, which the Israelis want to strengthen to insure their security once Israeli forces are withdrawn. The Lebanese want to abolish the group.
Mr. Karami said Thursday that he had requested a meeting with Mr. Reagan for next week, but the Administration official said Mr. Reagan's schedule, heavy with campaign appearances, could not accommodate the Lebanese official.
Today in New York, Mr. Shultz met with Foreign Minister Farouk al- Sharaa of Syria and condemned the terrorism and kidnappings in the Middle East, which, he noted, had been directed at the United States in particular. American officials have privately said Syria had at least condoned the terrorism because explosives had gone through Syrian Army lines.
 
Concern Over Terrorism
An aide to Mr. Shultz said Mr. Sharaa shared the concern over the terrorism and kidnappings and said President Hafez al-Assad of Syria was doing what he could to locate and free those who had been kidnapped.
Mr. Sharaa, however, underscored the differences among the sides over the situation in Lebanon. The Israelis have said they would pull their 15,000 troops out of southern Lebanon, but only if they were satisfied by the security arrangements worked out with the Lebanese to insure that Israeli settlements in northern Israel were not endangered.
Meeting with reporters in New York, Mr. Sharaa said the Israelis should pull out of Lebanon unconditionally without requiring the Lebanese to do anything. He suggested that the United States should bring pressure on the Israelis, because, he said, ''the American Administration bears some responsibility for the Israeli invasion.''
An aide to Mr. Shultz said Mr. Shultz had reiterated to the Syrian official that the United States had opposed the Israeli invasion of Lebanon.
 
Israel Rejected Reagan Plan
Although President Reagan has repeated his commitment to his Sept. 1, 1982, initiative for the Middle East, a plan that was rejected by the Israeli Government at the time, the senior Administration official said it was not realistic to expect early progress toward resuming overall Arab-Israeli negotiations because of the sharp differences within the new Israeli Government over how to proceed.
Mr. Peres, the leader of the Labor Party, has supported the Reagan plan, while Yitzhak Shamir, the head of the Likud bloc, who is Deputy Prime Minister and Foreign Minister, opposes it.
''The area of Middle East peace negotiations is the one that has been most difficult for the unity Government to resolve by itself, and it will take time to sort out,'' the Administration official said.


End of Document