U.S. ACTS TO BLOCK ASSETS OF CHARITY IN BOSNIA, SOMALIA;
 TREASURY CHIEF SAYS SOME OF THE FUNDS HAVE AIDED TERRORISM
St. Louis Post-Dispatch (Missouri)
March 12, 2002 Tuesday Five Star Lift Edition


Copyright 2002 St. Louis Post-Dispatch, Inc.
Section: NEWS; Pg. A4
Length: 457 words
Byline: The Associated Press
Dateline: WASHINGTON
Body


The United States expanded its effort to sever terrorists from their funding Monday, moving to block assets of an Islamic charity's branches in Bosnia and Somalia.
Treasury Secretary Paul O'Neill said the action was being taken jointly with the government of Saudi Arabia, a sign of growing international cooperation in the financial war on terrorism.
"We take a new step in the war on terrorist financing, making our first joint designation of a financial supporter of terrorism," O'Neill said.
He said the U.S. government has evidence that some money from the Al-Haramain Islamic Foundation's offices in Bosnia and Somalia had been diverted to support terrorist activities, but he wouldn't offer details.
The Treasury Department's action targets only the foundation's branches in those two countries. The charity is based in Riyadh, Saudi Arabia, and has offices in more than 50 countries, according to its Web site.
"Few deceits are more reprehensible than the act of collecting charity from well-intentioned donors and then diverting those funds to support hatred and cruelty," O'Neill said.
The foundation, according to its Web site, uses donations for many activities, including educating people about Islamic doctrine, providing medical aid and food to some countries and financing the building of schools, mosques and other projects.
A U.S. representative of the group did not return a call requesting comment.
The Treasury Department said the charity's office in Somalia is linked to Osama bin Laden's al-Qaida terrorist network and to Al-Itihaad al-Islamiya (AIAI), a Somali terrorist group.
The Bosnia office is linked to Al-Gama'at Al-Islamiyya, an Egyptian terrorist group that supported bin Laden's Feb. 23, 1998, fatwa - or Islamic edict - in which he called on Muslims to kill Americans, Treasury said.
Over the past few years, the charity's Somali branch has funneled money to AIAI "by disguising funds as if they were intended for orphanage projects or Islamic school and mosque construction," Treasury said.
Treasury also said the Somali branch employed members of AIAI and provided them with salaries through Al-Barakaat Bank, which the United States in a previous blocking action said was a chief source of funding and intelligence for bin Laden.
O'Neill said it was too early to know whether the charity's branches in Bosnia and Somalia have any financial assets in the United States and how much money would be frozen by Monday's action.
More than $104 million in financial assets linked to al-Qaida and Afghanistan's former ruling Taliban militia have been blocked worldwide since Sept. 11. The United States has identified 191 individuals and organizations suspected of financing or engaging in terrorism and wants their assets frozen.

Notes

WAR ON TERROR

Graphic

 
PHOTO; Photo headshot - (Treasury Secretary Paul) O'Neill; "Few deceits are more reprehensible"

Load-Date: March 12, 2002


End of Document