U.S. warnings to Syria gain attention; Weapons, terrorism: Iran pledges nonmilitary help and Saudi Arabia hosts a meeting of Iraq's neighbors
Telegraph Herald (Dubuque, IA)
April 16, 2003 Wednesday


Copyright 2003 Woodward Communications, Inc.
Section: Pg. a10
Length: 409 words
Byline: ASSOCIATED PRESS
Dateline: RIYADH, Saudi Arabia
Body


Mideast powers, some of them friends of the United States, are taking seriously the possibility of U.S. action against Syria after warnings that Damascus not shelter members of Saddam Hussein's ousted regime or sponsor terrorism.
Iran quickly came to Syria's defense, saying it will employ all nonmilitary means to prevent a U.S. attack on its ally. And Saudi Arabia is hosting a meeting of Iraq's neighbors this week that is expected to discuss the U.S. warnings.
In Damascus, few Syrians understand why President Bush is coming after them. Their country, they feel, has cooperated in the war against terrorism, and gave Arab cover to U.N. Resolution 1441 demanding Saddam disarm or face the consequences.
"They are extremely disappointed," said Maggie Mitchell at the Washington-based Middle East Institute, who recently met with officials in the Syrian capital. "They helped in the fight against al-Qaida and they went against Syrian and Arab public opinion to back a resolution that the United States used to go to war against Iraq."
The six-nation Gulf Cooperation Council on Tuesday rejected U.S. threats against Syria and called on the United States and Britain to carry out a dialogue with Damascus.
"We reject the threats against Syria and we believe that the threats should stop," Qatari Foreign Minister Sheik Hamad bin Jassim bin Jabor Al Thani told reporters in Riyadh.
The foreign minister said the Gulf Cooperation Council has "good relations with the United States and the United Kingdom and we are talking to them now on the Syrian issue."
U.S. officials in the past two days have accused Syria of sheltering Iraqi fugitives, possessing chemical weapons and supporting terrorism.
Secretary of State Colin Powell, while emphasizing that the United States has no plans to go to war with Syria, had this warning: "They should review their actions and their behavior, not only with respect to who gets haven in Syria and weapons of mass destruction, but especially the support of terrorist activity … We will examine possible measures of a diplomatic, economic or other nature as we move forward."
The Syrians have flatly denied the allegations as misinformation inspired by its archenemy Israel.
"Even the Israelis will pay the price for it in the future if they don't tell their friends in Washington to stop it," Syrian Foreign Minister Farouk al-Sharaa said. "They (Americans) shouldn't encourage them … They are encouraging a very sinister game."

Load-Date: April 16, 2003


End of Document