U.S.: BE WARY OF TERRORISM SMUGGLER ARREST PUTS OFFICIALS ON ALERT
 Philadelphia Daily News
DECEMBER 21, 1999 Tuesday LATE SPORTS EDITION


Copyright 1999 Philadelphia Newspapers, LLC  All Rights Reserved


Section: NATIONAL; Pg. 31
Length: 284 words
Byline: Associated Press
Dateline: WASHINGTON
Body


Despite the arrest of a man trying to smuggle explosive materials into Washington state aboard a ferry from Canada, U.S. authorities know of no specific terror threats against domestic targets, President Clinton's national security adviser said yesterday.
But the arrest, and suspicions that the man may be linked to terrorist groups, prompted officials to heighten security and to caution Americans to watch out during the holiday season for signs of terrorist activities.
And the U.S. Customs Service said it is adding 300 extra inspectors at high-priority entry points.
Sandy Berger, the president's national security adviser, said U.S. authorities are investigating what plans Ahmed Ressam may have had for the nitroglycerin and other potential bomb-making materials in his car when he was arrested in Port Angeles, Wash., after taking a ferry last week from Victoria, British Columbia.
Speaking to reporters, Berger urged Americans to be vigilant as they plan New Year's activities but also said officials know of no specific threats against targets in the United States.
At the State Department, spokesman James Foley said it was too early to know if Ressam is a member of a terror group.
"Obviously, they're looking into his motivation, his intentions, whether he had accomplices and whether he was part of a wider network and is affiliated with international terrorist groups," Foley said.
Foley noted the State Department recently cautioned Americans abroad to be especially careful.
"We've indicated that we have information that terrorists are undertaking planning for attacks during the New Year period" overseas, Foley said.
"It is obviously particularly important now for there to be maximum vigilance."

Load-Date: October 22, 2002


End of Document