U.S. May Tell Soviets: Let's Share Some Secrets
The New York Times
April 21, 1989, Friday, Late City Final Edition


Copyright 1989 The New York Times Company
Section: Section A; Page 10, Column 3; Foreign Desk
Length: 762 words
Byline: By THOMAS L. FRIEDMAN, Special to The New York Times
Dateline: WASHINGTON, April 20
Body


The Bush Administration is considering proposing to the Soviet Union that the two countries share intelligence data, the better to combat terrorism and the spread of missiles, Administration officials said today.
The proposal is part of a broad negotiating brief the Bush Administration is preparing for Secretary of State James A. Baker 3d to take to Moscow May 10 to 11, when he will meet with Mikhail S. Gorbachev, the Soviet leader. The idea is significant because it is premised on the belief that changes in the Soviet Union have become promising enough for Washington to consider cooperative efforts that would have previously been unthinkable.
''Five years ago it would have been a way-out idea,'' said William Colby, the former Director of Central Intelligence. ''Today, I would say that it might be a little difficult, but not impossible. I think we could exchange information on groups that neither of us feels any responsiblity for. The minute you get close to the bone, though, one side or the other might clam up a bit, but there are a lot of crazy terrorist groups out there whom we could cooperate on getting information about. We'd both benefit. We could contribute a little information and they could, and you end up with a much bigger pie.''
On Sharing Information
As for sharing information with the Soviets without revealing American intelligence abilities or sources, Mr. Colby said: ''It is a problem you have any time you share information, whether with the British or Israelis or anybody else. But there are ways to turn out the substance without revealing the source.''
In a recent meeting with reporters, the Director of Central Intelligence, William H. Webster, was somewhat more skeptical about the idea, which has strong backing in the State Department. Mr. Webster was clearly reflecting wariness about sharing any data with the K.G.B. - something that has never been done before.
''I don't know how we would approach that,'' he said. ''We want to reduce the threat of terrorism, but there are many ways to do it that do not necessarily involve intelligence agency to intelligence agency sharing.''
Mr. Webster added, though, that while Moscow and Washington could find themselves arguing over who is a ''terrorist'' and who is a ''freedom fighter,'' there clearly were cases -such as the explosion of Pan Am flight 103 - in sharing information could have mutual benefit.
Giving an example, a State Department official said: ''We might come to them and say: 'We have information on this group that is about to do something. Can you get in touch with your friends and get them to stop? We hear that such an organization is recruiting people for some operation we don't, can you check it out?'
 
'A Limited Exchange'
''We may start with a very limited exchange, see how it works, and then start to broaden it,'' the official said.
The idea is reflective of what is expected to be the Bush Administration's general approach to the Soviet Union, once its policy reviews have been completed by early May. That is, to make concrete proposals that will test just how real is Moscow's ''new thinking'' not only on the traditional East-West arms agenda, but also on a broad array of North-South issues, from terrorism and the drug trade to environmental cooperation.
The Bush Administration is clearly still torn between a ''don't-rock-the-boat'' instinct, which argues that no radical new initiatives toward Moscow are needed when the Soviets are making unilateral concessions, and a ''don't-miss-the-boat'' instinct, which contends that the Gorbachev regime presents an extraordinary opportunity to reshape Soviet-American relations.
''If you want to have an activist policy toward the Soviet Union and to test their new thinking, but without necessarily taking steps, at this stage, which would involve radical arms control proposals going to the heart of American security, then the best way to do it is in some of these other areas like terrorism or regional conflicts,'' an Administration official said.
''Are the Soviets really ready to cooperate in combating terrorism by sharing intelligence they might have about certain organizations, or is it just talk?'' he added. ''That's what we want to see. How they respond in these areas will then bounce back and influence our own positions on arms control.''
The same approach is expected to be used on the spread of missiles. The issue has been discussed by the United States and the Soviet Union before, but Mr. Baker plans to propose a way to begin to institutionalize Soviet-American cooperation in this area.


End of Document