U.S. AGENTS GOT WORD OF SUDDEN MOVES BEFORE EMBASSY BLASTS / WHETHER THEY WERE RELATED ISN'T CLEAR. OFFICIALS ARE PONDERING HOW TO FIGHT TERRORISM AND TO STRIKE BACK.
 The Philadelphia Inquirer
AUGUST 13, 1998 Thursday SF EDITION


Copyright 1998 Philadelphia Newspapers, LLC  All Rights Reserved


Section: NATIONAL; Pg. A17
Length: 847 words
Byline: John Donnelly, INQUIRER WASHINGTON BUREAU
Dateline: WASHINGTON
Body


Around the time of the dual bombings in Africa, U.S. intelligence agents learned of a worldwide threat to American installations - and moved quickly to fortify the U.S. Embassy in Egypt. Agents also learned of a sudden mass dispersal of terrorist financier Osama bin Laden's deputies from hideouts in Afghanistan.
Were the incidents a coincidence or connected? Was either related to the bombings?
It's hard to know at this time, but the developments illustrate the complexities that come into play both in solving last week's twin explosions of U.S. embassies in Kenya and Tanzania and in America's overall fight against global terrorism.
The United States' first response to the bombings was to issue quick-fire orders: Search for victims, secure embassies worldwide, find the killers. Now the focus swings to more difficult questions: How does the United States fight terrorism? How does it hit back?
In a private briefing yesterday at the White House, President Clinton discussed with his top national security advisers how best to defend U.S. installations around the world. The group also talked about how the United States can take a more offensive strategy against terrorism, according to White House spokesman P.J. Crowley.
In the past, when a nation clearly initiated a terrorist act against Americans, the United States has not hesitated to use military force. A recent example was the bombing of targets in Baghdad after a failed attempt by Iraqi agents to assassinate former President George Bush in Kuwait.
But what if no such proof is found, yet all evidence points to a terrorist organization?
Many counterterrorism and security experts around the world argue for far fewer restrictions on U.S. agents hunting the killers.
"This is war," said Neil Livingstone, a Washington-based counterterrorism expert who has advised countries around the world on fighting terrorists. "I believe in the Israelization of U.S. terrorism policy."
By that, Livingstone meant holding nothing back in retaliating - even assassinating terrorists, a tactic used by Israel and only thinly veiled by its leaders.
The most recent U.S. response to fighting terror, though, was in 1996 when Congress passed a law that calls for a 10-year sentence and fines for anyone convicted of providing funding, weapons or a safe haven to terrorists. Last year, for the first time, Secretary of State Madeleine K. Albright identified 30 terrorist groups that fall under the law.
On the question of killing terrorists, U.S. Executive Order 12333 bans assassinations. Crowley said yesterday he knew of no move within the administration to change the order.
Even if the United States sanctioned the killing of terrorists, there are pitfalls to such acts. Boaz Ganor, academic director of the International Policy Institute for Counter-Terrorism in Israel, said that such attacks often "create a boomerang effect, and the terrorists hit you back, often much harder."
Those who study terrorist organizations say the groups are mostly highly rational and often think in terms of a "cost-benefit" analysis when they decide whether to launch an attack. If that's the case in the bombings in Kenya and Tanzania, one logical part of the analysis would have been the Americans' record in solving past attacks, the analysts said.
The record is not good. Still unsolved: the 1996 Khobar Towers bombing in Saudi Arabia that killed 19 U.S. servicemen; the 1988 explosion on Pan Am Flight 103 over Lockerbie, Scotland, that killed 270 people; and three car-bomb attacks in Beirut in 1983 and 1984 in which 274 Americans died.
The challenge now, experts say, is to develop better intelligence coordination with other nations and then sharpen the American intelligence analysis. It's not an easy task, especially considering that the 280 U.S. missions abroad file 30,000 reports annually that contain some possibility of a threat.
A day before the two bombings in East Africa on Friday, the Arab daily Al Hayat in London published a threat by the Egyptian Islamic Jihad group that it would attack American targets because of the arrests of four members of the group. Albanian secret police, reportedly accompanied by CIA agents, rounded up the suspects and handed them over to Egyptian authorities.
Only a few hours after the paper published the threat, Egypt dispatched extra soldiers around the well-fortified U.S. Embassy in downtown Cairo, according to a U.S. Embassy official in Cairo, speaking on condition of anonymity. "They really tightened the security around this place," the official said. "But it's a country-by-country thing on a threat like that. A lot depends on the country's own security forces."
Ganor gives high marks to the United States for taking strong public stances against terror groups. But he said that secret intelligence-gathering efforts had become much more difficult in recent years.
As the Clinton administration wrestles with strategies to thwart attacks, a key test continues to unfold in the hunt for these terrorists.
"You've got to bring people to justice," Livingstone said. "We've had too much failure."

Load-Date: October 24, 2002


End of Document