U.S. Intervenes in Middle East
Salem State Log: Salem State
October 20, 2014 Monday


University Wire
Copyright 2014 UWIRE via U-Wire All Rights Reserved
Section: OPINION; Pg. 1
Length: 555 words
Body


By Kristin Bornstein / Log Staff Writer
A strong surge of violence in the Middle East has recently thrust the threat of terrorism back into the media spotlight.
President Barack Obama addressed the nation on Sept. 11, and described the emergence of the Islamic State of Iraq and Levant , a jihadist group that is set on forming an Islamic Caliphate operating under Sharia Law. The group currently threatens the sovereignty of Iraq and Syria, as ISIL has gained control of territory overlapping the neighboring countries.
During his speech, Obama spoke about deploying "several hundred' American service members in Iraq this past June to support and train Iraqi and Kurdish forces. He reiterated that U.S military forces would not physically engage in combat missions.
Obama revealed information about American-led airstrikes Iraq that began in August, and said that the American military would offer assistance to opposition fighters.
He called on Congress to authorize additional resources to train and equip a group of rebel forces officially known as the Syrian Opposition Coalition. "I have the authority to address the threat from ISIL," Obama said. "But I believe we are strongest as a nation when the President and Congress work together. So I welcome congressional support for this effort."
This is a large departure from Obama's "mission accomplished" message in 2011, where he announced that he would be phasing out military intervention in Iraq and Afghanistan.
So why the change of heart?
Since Obama's inauguration in 2009, he has promised to remain proactive and responsive to  terrorism, and the American government has reason to consider ISIL a serious threat.
ISIL has abducted and publicly beheaded two American journalists, Steven Sotloff and James Foley. The organization also released video messages in which members of ISIL threatened America and its allies, and there have been mention of singular "lone wolf" terrorist attacks that could possibly be carried out by extremists on American soil.
On Sept. 18, the White House issued a statement announcing that Congress voted in favor of funding the Syrian rebel forces, allowing the U.S. military to provide training and equipment to the Syrian Opposition Coalition. Obama called this a "counter-terorrism campaign."
According to Obama, the campaign "will be waged through a steady, relentless effort to take out ISIL wherever they exist using our air power and our support for partner forces on the ground." Obama called it s "strategy of taking out terrorists who threaten us, while supporting partners on the front lines
In Massachusetts congressional support for the bill was mixed.
According to Masslive.com, U.S. Senators Elizabeth Warren and Ed Markey voted against the act, and of nine U.S. Representatives, only Richard Neal and Stephen Lynch voted in favor of the measure.
Concern has been raised over the constitutionality of interference in Syria because, according to the War Powers Resolution, the president cannot declare war against any nation without the authorization of Congress.
Yet, support is growing on an international level. The Washington Post reported on Sept. 25 that more than 60 nations, including the European Union and Arab League, have joined a broad coalition to fight ISIL, and will provide aid such as air support and military equipment.

Load-Date: October 20, 2014


End of Document