U.S. AND LIBYA: ARE THE VIEWS IN BOTH DIRECTIONS DISTORTED?
The New York Times
November 28, 1981, Saturday, Late City Final Edition


Copyright 1981 The New York Times Company
Section: Section 1; Page 1, Column 5; Foreign Desk
Length: 2100 words
Byline: By ALAN COWELL, Special to the New York Times
Dateline: TRIPOLI, Libya, Nov. 22
Body


There is a vision of America on the sidewalks here: A death's-head is cloaked in the Stars and Stripes, arms emerge from the flag, brandishing a scythe-like dagger and a bomb. Another wall poster displays a creature that is half-rodent, half-reptile, strangled by an Arab hand.
The images are harsh and resemble the creations of Hieronymus Bosch. Yet in the view of some of America's West European allies, they are no more harsh, or absolutist, than the Reagan Administration's vision of Col. Muammar el-Qaddafi, whom Washington calls the most dangerous man in the world because of his perceived role in international terrorism.
The Qaddafi regime, in the West European view, is more complex, and probably less dangerous, than the Reagan Administration is prepared to acknowledge. Washington's assessment, it is contended, is a deliberate oversimplification, possibly based on tainted information, that could prove inimical to Western interests in Libya's oil wealth and propel the colonel closer to the Soviet Union. The West European view is shared by some American oil men here.
Alan Cowell comment discusses anti-US propoganda in Libya and Reagan Administration's anti-Libyan statements
Colonel Qaddafi came to power in a military coup in 1969 that overthrew the Western-backed King Idris. The colonel has set up a welfare state providing free housing, schooling and health care and has filled the stores with consumer goods. He has also set up a police state in which a variety of control mechanisms, some of them tuned by the Soviet Union and its allies, regulate the lives of the country's 2.5 million people.
Under his uncompromising tutelage, Libya has been thrust onto a course dictated by a political creed that he has titled ''the third universal theory.'' The theory is contained in the three slender volumes of his ''Green Book,'' which, the colonel says, provides a ''final solution'' to the problems of government.
What has disturbed the Reagan Administration, however, is the colonel's adventures beyond his borders, which have been interpreted, in the United States and in parts of Africa, as expansionist, subversive of Western interests and supportive of terrorism. At the same time, Libya is at the forefront of the Arabs against Israel and is a leading opponent of the Camp David peace accords.
The Reagan Administration makes no secret of its wish to see Colonel Qaddafi removed. In Tripoli, however, there is a different perspective among the foreign analysts whose job it is to monitor the colonel's activities.
The divergences between the West European and American views, these analysts said, is twofold: the West Europeans, while acknowledging Colonel Qaddafi's anti-Western behavior, argue that he is not so dangerous as the Reagan Administration maintains and, indeed, has a track record of failures, such as his retreats from Uganda and Chad and his alienation of many African leaders.
 
'Talk to Him'
Secondly, the analysts say, the West Europeans fundamentally disagree with Washington's handling of the problems posed by Colonel Qaddafi. ''The Americans have no communication whatever with Qaddafi,'' one analyst said. ''The West European view is that it is in the Western interest to talk to him, if Western economic interests are to be protected and if he is to be kept from closer ties with the Russians.''
It is the economic interest that looms large in the European argument for, the analysts said, the large Western stake in Libya's oil industry acts as a counterbalance to Soviet influence, while providing lucrative contracts for American and other Western countries in projects paid for with oil money.
It is a token of the effectiveness of the colonel's internal security mechanisms and of the fears they spawn that none of these analysts wished to be quoted by name and all agreed to discuss him only in return for total anonymity.
Most of them agreed that Colonel Qaddafi, a man seized with his own visions of Islamic greatness and of a revolution based on the ''third universal theory,'' is difficult to deal with. He is virulently anti-American in his speeches, the analysts said. His style before an audience can be, in the words of one informant, ''neo-Hitlerian.'' He has financed dissident, anti-Western groups and individuals, and his policy aims in the Middle East collide with those of Washington.
 
'He Does Not Make It Easy'
''Like all dictators,'' one Western analyst said, ''he expects the other person to understand him. His ability to make himself understood is almost nil.''
He went on: ''He would like to have the West Europeans put his case to the Americans, but he does not make it easy for them to do so.  And, of course, his views are an inversion of Washington's. The Reagan Administration sees him as a critical threat in the Middle East. He sees Israel as the critical issue.''
Colonel Qaddafi's approach to the West has often been bellicose.  The American and French Embassies here have been burned down by mobs, apparently acting on his orders, and sophisticated firebombs were thrown at the British Embassy last year. Unlike Washington, however, the West Europeans seem ready to avoid confrontation and seek a closer understanding of Colonel Qaddafi, largely to shield economic interests rather than out of any ideological affinity with him.
''Look at it from his point of view,'' one analyst said. ''There has been a whole catalogue of anti-Libyan acts by the Reagan Administration - many of which Qaddafi has brought on himself -that have convinced him that Washington is out to get him.''
Colonel Qaddafi's anti-Western sentiments, as well as his ability to bring trouble from the West on his own head, are not disputed. His aircraft fired first in the August clash with United States Navy warplanes over the Gulf of Sidra, for instance, and Colonel Qaddafi has dispatched assassination squads to seek out his enemies abroad.  But, against this, it is argued, there are more subtle shadings that the Reagan Administration ignores and there is a compendium of anti-Libyan acts by the United States that have bewildered the Tripoli authorities.
In the Gulf of Sidra affair, the unhesitating response of the Navy aircraft in shooting down the Libyan planes, it is suggested, signaled a prearranged readiness to give no quarter.
Articles in the American press about reports of a plot by the Central Intelligence Agency to eliminate Colonel Qaddafi have been taken seriously here, as have comments by senior Administration officials, including Secretary of State Alexander M. Haig Jr., that Washington would like to see him removed.
With a degree of paranoia, the analysts said, Libya is also convinced that the United States is seeking its economic strangulation by exerting pressure on Saudi Arabia to maintain an oversupply of oil on world markets and thus penalize the Libyan oil industry. At the same time, the military manuevers involving American troops with some of Libya's main enemies in the Middle East -Egypt, the Sudan, Somalia and Oman -is seen by the Libyans as a direct and bellicose threat, the analysts said.
''He is genuinely afraid of Washington's hostility,'' said the analyst discussing Qaddafi's perspective of the United States. ''Seen from Tripoli, it looks like hysteria.''
 
'Nothing If Not Neurotic'
''The Libyans are nothing if not neurotic about the Reagan Administration,'' this informant continued. ''By pushing Qaddafi, you push him only one way - toward Moscow. The West Europeans think that America is forcing Qaddafi to become a supplicant to the Russians. He has nowhere else to turn for protection.''
In the past, Colonel Qaddafi has professed nonalignment. In recent speeches, however, he has questioned the value of this posture if, as it seems, one superpower is openly hostile to him. ''Washington thinks he is anyhow a Soviet puppet,'' one analyst conversant with West European thinking said. ''But it is not so simple. His activities may coincide with Soviet interests. But they are not necessarily dictated by the Russians.''
As evidence of this, it is contended, Colonel Qaddafi has maintained financial independence from Moscow and has acted independently of the Soviet Union in, for instance, striking a pact earlier this year with Ethiopia and South Yemen. The pact was not, reportedly, Soviet-inspired. It is suggested, too, that his overtures to the Russians in recent months are a direct reaction to Reagan Administration policy toward him.
West European alarms seem to center on protecting intertwined economic and diplomatic interests here. The Reagan Administration, however, is less cautious, and has urged United States companies to trim their operations in Libya.
In the American view, such action is justified by Colonel Qaddafi's perceived role as an exporter of ''international terrorism.'' His invasion of Chad last December, his funding of anti-government, leftwing groups in many African countries and his readiness to send out assassination squads all contribute to the American picture of Colonel Qaddafi as a man of singular evil, whose activities coincide so closely with Soviet interests as to be indistinguishable from them.
But here, too, the West Europeans see things in a more ambiguous light, and analysts cite other aspects of the colonel's activities.  At West European insistence, informants here said, Colonel Qaddafi ordered the withdrawal of Libyan assassination squads from Western Europe last year and there has been no conclusive evidence since then that they have returned. Secretary of State Haig has said, to the contrary, that there is evidence that Libyan assassins are after American targets to exact vengeance for the Gulf of Sidra humiliation.
The West Europeans feel, too, that the Reagan Administration's singling out of Colonel Qaddafi is inspired by a bullishness drawn from domestic political considerations. From this perspective, analysts said, the Reagan Administration's campaign against ''international terrorism'' is seen as inconsistent. An informant said: ''The British, for instance, tend to feel that if the U.S. is so keen to halt terrorism, why doesn't it also have a campaign against private American funding of the Irish Republican Army?''
There is, too, a kind of semantic inversion of values. Colonel Qaddafi supports hard-line factions of the Palestine Liberation Organization, which many Americans consider to be terrorist, but which is recognized elsewhere as a legitimate liberation movement. At the same time, Colonel Qaddafi's support for ''terrorist'' organizations is not universal: analysts say that he has withheld backing for the Baader-Meinhof group in West Germany, the Red Brigades in Italy and airplane hijackings in general because they are ''terrorist.''
At stake, it is argued, is the West's involvement in Libya's oil fields, and in the $62 billion development plan that has grown from oil wealth and has provided lucrative contracts. ''Qaddafi has not moved against these interests,'' one Western analyst said. ''But if the Reagan Administration has its way and he is removed, it could be dangerous for everybody. There could be another Iran here. A lot of revolutionary fervor has built up under Qaddafi and it would be unleashed if he were eliminated.''
 
Posture 'May Be Bluff'
The situation is made more complex by Colonel Qaddafi's ambigious relationship with the West. ''Qaddafi still wants improved relations with the United States and he is heavily dependent on Western technology to run the oil fields,'' one analyst said. ''So his posture at the moment and his threat to move closer to the Russians may be bluff. But it's the only option he's got.''
Over the last five years, the Russians have earned an estimated $12 billion from weapons sales to the Libyans, who have reportedly paid in cash, providing Moscow with a source of foreign exchange. However, Westerners here argue, the Russians may be wary of becoming too closely involved with Colonel Qaddafi if they cannot control him.
''Imagine if the Soviets had some kind of mutual friendship and defense treaty with the Libyans. They could be dragged in far deeper than they want,'' one analyst said.
A further repercussion of Washington's attitude to Colonel Qaddafi seems, already, to have been the introduction of strains within the Western alliance over how the Libyan leader should be handled. ''That may be Qaddafi's aim and it coincides with Moscow's interests,'' an authoritative source said. ''The West Europeans are at loggerheads with Washington over Qaddafi and, certainly, they feel the Reagan Administration should at least talk to him first before getting tough.''

Graphic

 
Illustrations: photo of Col. Muammar el-Qaddafi


End of Document