U.S. Should Shun Torture, Clinton Says in New York
The New York Times
December 17, 2014 Wednesday
Late Edition - Final


Copyright 2014 The New York Times Company
Section: Section A; Column 0; National Desk; Pg. 24
Length: 291 words
Byline: By AMY CHOZICK; Megan Thee-Brenan contributed reporting.
Body


Hillary Rodham Clinton on Tuesday made an impassioned argument against the use of torture in her first remarks about the issue since the Senate Intelligence Committee released its scathing report last week about interrogation tactics used by the Central Intelligence Agency.
Accepting the Robert F. Kennedy Human Rights Award in New York, Mrs. Clinton said she was ''proud to have been a part of the Obama administration that banned'' some torture practices.
The nation ''should not practice or condone torture anywhere in the world,'' she said. ''That should be absolutely clear as a matter of both policy and law.''
The Senate report has led to intense debate on brutal tactics and their effectiveness in gleaning information from terrorism suspects, but few potential 2016 presidential candidates have addressed the issue since the report's release.
Mrs. Clinton, as a former secretary of state, was under particular pressure to comment. ''It is possible to keep us safe from terrorism and reduce crime and violence without relying on torture abroad or unnecessary force or excessive incarceration at home,'' she said.
She said that she supported Senator John McCain's plea against torture and that banning such practices ''should not be an issue of partisan politics.'' New polls from CBS News, Pew Research Center and ABC News/Washington Post show that, on balance, Americans think the C.I.A. was justified in its interrogation of suspected terrorists after Sept. 11, 2001, and that the techniques were successful.
Strong majorities of Republicans say torture was justified, but less than half of Democrats agree. All three polls were conducted Dec. 11-14 and have margins of sampling error ranging from plus or minus three to four percentage points.

http://www.nytimes.com/2014/12/17/us/us-should-shun-torture-clinton-says-in-new-york.html

Load-Date: December 17, 2014


End of Document