U.S. bolsters efforts to avert terrorism
The Tampa Tribune (Florida)
July 13, 1996, Saturday,
FINAL EDITION


Copyright 1996 The Tribune Co. Publishes The Tampa Tribune
Section: NATION/WORLD,
Length: 416 words
Body


SUMMARY: Infiltration and interception may be among the methods used to prevent a new attack on U.S. forces in Saudi Arabia.
WASHINGTON - The United States is taking aggressive steps in Saudi Arabia to ward off what the Pentagon expects will be more attacks on U.S. forces, Air Force Gen. Howell Estes said Friday.
"You can't sit here and wait to be attacked," said Estes, director of operations for the Joint Chiefs of Staff. "You've got to get aggressive and try to stop it."
An Associated Press report
A defense official said the counter-terrorism steps could include increased efforts to infiltrate terrorist groups, stepped-up border patrols to prevent outside terrorists from getting into Saudi Arabia, and quick-reaction teams to intercept terrorists or terrorist supplies.
Defense Secretary William Perry has come under criticism from Republicans in connection with the June 25 truck bombing of the Khobar Towers complex in Dhahran, Saudi Arabia, that killed 19 U.S. airmen and wounded hundreds.
U.S. military security experts, as well as FBI investigators in Saudi Arabia, are examining a new wave of threats directed at American forces in Saudi Arabia. Estes rated the chances of another attack as "likely" and said officials expect the magnitude of the attack to increase.
"There have been some additional warnings. We don't know if they're true or not, but we're not in any position to treat them lightly," Estes said. "We're not only looking at a threat of the magnitude of this bomb. We're looking at threats well beyond that because we're not going to get caught short on this again."
Barriers at Khobar Towers have been moved from about 105 feet to 400 feet from the complex. But Estes said terrorists could design a more powerful bomb that could inflict similar damage and casualties despite the broader buffer zone.
According to defense officials other steps the United States is considering to thwart terrorism include:  - Stepped up "human intelligence" involving the use of agents and sources capable of providing direct information on terrorist group activities.  - Expanded security teams to guard U.S. forces and conduct surveillance of suspected terrorist groups or individuals.  - An increased focus of national intelligence assets such as spy satellites and listening devices on Saudi Arabia and nearby countries that may be sponsoring terrorist activities, particularly Iran and Iraq.  - The use of special operations personnel to conduct intercept operations aimed at terrorists.

Load-Date: July 15, 1996


End of Document