U.S. must battle terrorism more aggressively, writer says
Chicago Daily Herald
February 13, 2002, Wednesday F3


Copyright 2002 Paddock Publications, Inc.
Section: NEWS;
Length: 502 words
Byline: Christopher Petersen Daily Herald Correspondent
Body


The events of Sept. 11 must have seemed to many like the plot of a spy novel come horrifyingly true.  
But one suburban author seemingly predicted that tragic day in a 1999 novel. And while his scenario was pure fiction, he believes the Unites States will have to make some changes in policy to deal with the reality of the war on terrorism.  
Michael Kahn wrote "The Screaming Eagles" two years ago, but its plot mirrors the September terrorist attacks in many ways. The book is about a terrorist plot to destroy America through sneak attacks, one involving planes flown deliberately into passenger jets.  
The 64-year-old Kahn, who lives in Lisle, told members of the Batavia Rotary Club on Tuesday morning that he wrote the book from personal experience.  
Born in South Africa, Kahn volunteered to fight for Israel during the Yom Kippur War, then lived in Iran until the Ayatollah Khomeini seized power in 1979.  
Kahn has been interviewed many times since Sept. 11 on the subject of terrorism, including once by CNN. He said the war against terrorism is a world war, but unlike World War I or World War II because it is an ideological war. Kahn said that the United States' war against communism is a more appropriate comparison.  
"I believe if we do not do something very drastic, we're going to have another 60-year war," he said.  
Kahn said the United States must stand alone to win the war against terrorism, even if it angers other nations. "The only way we're going to win this war is to take very politically-incorrect steps to do it," Kahn said.  
In Kahn's opinion, coalition-building is the wrong way for America to go about fighting terrorism because each nation has its own agenda and may try to hold the United States back in trying to root out terrorist organizations. More important than destroying terrorist cells, Kahn said, is overthrowing the governments that support them.  
"If you want to take out bin Laden, you have to find the people behind him," Kahn said. In a television interview on Sept. 12, Kahn identified Iran, Iraq and Saudi Arabia as nations that support terrorism, months before President Bush named Iran and Iraq as members of the "axis of evil."  
"One of the biggest mistakes we made in Desert Storm was that we did not kill Saddam Hussein," Kahn said, adding that if he had been killed, the Sept. 11 attacks may not have happened.  
To prevent further tragedies, Kahn said America should act decisively, not worry about how those actions are perceived by the rest of the world and try to develop alternative sources of energy such as wind power, domestic oil drilling, or buying oil from Russia.  
"I would much rather buy oil from Russia because they're not sending people here to kill us," Kahn said.  
After Kahn's speech, some of those who were listening said they agreed with Kahn. "We have to get independent from those countries," said Rotary member Tom Van Cleave. "Then we can go in and alleviate the underground in those countries and make them friendly to the world."

Graphic

 
bateagles-ne0212batLS Lisle author Michael Kahn talks with Dan Anderson of Batavia and other members of the Batavia Rotary Club Tuesday morning about his book. Laura Stoecker/Daily Herald

Load-Date: February 13, 2002


End of Document