U.S. striving to ensure ports are shipshape against terrorism
 Philadelphia Daily News
November 16, 2001 Friday 4STAR EDITION


Copyright 2001 Philadelphia Newspapers, LLC  All Rights Reserved


Section: LOCAL; Pg. 17
Length: 486 words
Byline: RAMONA SMITH smithra@phillynews.com  
Body


The twin outboards whined as an orange-hulled Coast Guard patrol boat - with an alert, armed crew - eased away from a dock on the Delaware River, headed toward the Schuylkill.
The admiral in charge of East Coast operations looked on with approval yesterday during a trip to Philadelphia aimed at bolstering defenses against terrorism along the coast.
"What we're generally trying to do throughout the Coast Guard is assess our ports, where the critical vulnerabilities and threats exist, and try and figure out what level of care we need to exhibit after the 9-11 events," Vice Admiral Thad W. Allen said.
Because of the terrorist attacks, extraordinary defense tactics are in effect in Philadelphia and other major ports across the country.
Armed patrol boats prowl the rivers, and foreign ships must give four days' notice before they move from the ocean into Delaware Bay.
"That gives us a chance to screen the passengers, the crew, the type of vessel that it is and where it's coming from and the type of cargo," Allen said. "And where we think the vessel may pose a risk, we board the vessel at sea and make sure that all security concerns are taken care of before it enters the port."
In Philadelphia, the biggest petroleum port east of Houston, much of the concern centers on oil shipments and refineries from Philly to Wilmington.
Armed teams have boarded some ships in Delaware Bay and ridden them all the way to their destination dock, he said, as part of the tightest port security in the country since World War II. The boarding teams stay on board, he said, "if we think that a vessel presents a large enough threat because of either the cargo, or where the vessel originated, or because of particular passengers or crew on board."
Some of the concern apparently centers on the potential for a rogue or hijacked ship loaded with some explosive cargo such as propane. Some types of cargo "might present a hazard to the port if somehow the vessels were diverted," said Allen.
"Clearly we have critical infrastructure in this port complex, both the waterfront facilities, the bridges and other assets that we look to protect and assess their vulnerability," said Capt. Gregory Adams, captain of the Port of Philadelphia, which stretches down the Delaware River to the sea.
The focus of concern varies from port to port, said Allen, with Navy ships a major concern around Norfolk and Hampton Roads, Va. In all, the Coast Guard has beefed up security in 360 ports along 95,000 miles of shoreline nationwide.
Heightened vigilance has its downside, Allen admitted. Protecting busy ports - and at the same time keeping them open to shipping - is a tough balancing act that requires joint planning with maritime interests. Allen also met this week with officials of the Maritime Exchange.
The Coast Guard also has had to trim some of its drug-interception operations and other tasks to pump more resources into port defense. *

Notes

AMERICA AT WAR

Load-Date: November 16, 2001


End of Document