U.S. reachesplea deal atGuantanamomilitary trial
The Salt Lake Tribune
July 7, 2010 Wednesday


Copyright 2010 The Salt Lake Tribune All Rights Reserved
Section: NEWS; National; World
Length: 339 words
Byline: By Ben Fox The Associated Press
Body


San Juan, Puerto Rico » One of the first terrorism suspects taken to Guantanamo Bay reached a plea deal Wednesday with military prosecutors, giving President Barack Obama's administration its first conviction of a prisoner at the detention center in Cuba that it is struggling to close.
Ibrahim Ahmed Mahmoud al-Qosi pleaded guilty to one count each of providing material support for terrorism and conspiracy at a hearing before a military judge, sparing him from additional counts at trial.
Terms of the plea deal, including any limits on his sentence, were not publicly disclosed.
Al-Qosi -- who has been held at Guantanamo since January 2002 -- is scheduled to be sentenced by a panel of officers in August. Military legal authorities can reject the panel's sentencing decision if it exceeds what was agreed upon as part of the plea deal, said Navy Capt. David Iglesias, a spokesman for military commissions prosecutors.
The 50-year-old from Sudan faced a potential life sentence if convicted at trial. Iglesias declined to say how much more time, if any, the prisoner could serve under the agreement.
"Both sides reached an agreement that they felt was fair and it would be against the interests of justice not to accept it," Iglesias said in a phone interview from the Navy base in southeast Cuba.
Defense lawyers declined to comment to reporters.
Al-Qosi was accused of acting as accountant, paymaster, supply chief and cook for al-Qaida during the 1990s when the terror network was centered in Sudan and Afghanistan. He allegedly worked later as a bodyguard for Osama bin Laden.
He told the judge at his hearing that he acknowledged his offenses and he understood his plea deal but did not speak at length.
The military commissions at Guantanamo have been stalled for years by legal challenges and changes to the rules for prosecuting prisoners. Human rights groups say the system is still unfair and have said any prosecutions should be in civilian courts in the United States. Alt Heads:
U.S. reachesplea deal atGuantanamomilitary trial

Load-Date: July 7, 2010


End of Document