U.S. AGRICULTURE: RIPE FOR TERRORISM?;
CROPS, CATTLE SEEN AS TEMPTING TARGETS
Richmond Times Dispatch (Virginia)
January 31, 1999, Sunday,
CITY EDITION


Copyright 1999 The Richmond Times Dispatch
Section: AREA/STATE,
Length: 1285 words
Byline: Lawrence Latane; Times-Dispatch Staff Writer
Dateline: MOUNT HOLLY
Body


Many people think of terrorism as a sudden deadly explosion such as the Oklahoma City blast.
Not Dr. Thomas W. Frazier.
Overlooking the winter wheat fields near his home in rural Westmoreland County, Frazier believes he sees the battleground for a more likely threat: plant viruses and pests being intentionally sowed across the American landscape in an attempt to wreck the nation's agriculture.
"If you've got a crop spraying plane, you've got enough" to begin your own terror campaign, he said.
Others agree, including Dr. Floyd P. Horn, who runs the Agricultural Research Service in Wash- ington, the scientific arm of the U.S. Department of Agriculture.
"There's the potential for terrible economic and sociological and political effects," Horn said, "not to mention the impact on human health that could follow the introduction of diseases common to man and animals."
Since organizing his National Consortium for Genomic Resources Management and Services four years ago, Frazier, a psychologist, has become a student of biological and chemical warfare and has gradually focused on what he perceives as America's Achilles' heel.
"We think the next century is really going to be a biological century," Frazier said. Biological weapons "will be the poor countries method of choice. No country is going to attack the United States on the conventional battlefield or get into a nuclear conflict," he predicted.
"But, we see agricultural targets as becoming very attractive targets," he said. "For one thing, agriculture is one of America's strengths. Terrorism has psychological dynamics and very often a terrorist strategy may be one of turning a country's strengths against it."
"I think Tom is a very visionary guy," Horn said. "I think he's doing a tremendous service" calling attention to the threats facing agriculture.
Horn said the Agriculture Department is urging the White House to earmark money to improve crop protection and intelligence gathering in the budget President Clinton will be releasing tomorrow.<cmMonday.>
The agriculture department already devotes a lot of effort in screening plants, animals and food products that pass across U.S. borders, but a broader effort is needed to protect against an intentional introduction of a plant or animal pest or disease, Horn said. "We've got to find ways to recognize [threats] quickly and respond quickly."
"It's really critical something be done," Frazier said. "Here is a major hole in U.S. biological-chemical defenses."
Frazier's group is an umbrella organization for plant biologists, veterinary scientists and health specialists across the nation who are involved in a variety of issues including protecting global diversity of crops and wild plant and animal species.
They are sensitive to agriculture's vulnerability to biological and chemical attack because many of them work at controlling the accidental spread of diseases into the nation's crops and livestock herds from other countries.
Agriculture is seen as a tempting target of terrorism for many reasons, Frazier said. Crops and livestock generate $ 140 billion a year in export trade and historically have been the foundation of American strength.
"The nation's agricultural and food resources are probably softer and more likely targets than any of the various segments of the human population to which we have largely devoted our national security attention," Frazier wrote in a summary of a conference he held on agricultural security in Crystal City last fall. "The fact that America has the most reliable, secure and safe supply of food at a reasonable cost seems to have produced an intellectual lapse and a possible security lull on the part of the counterterrorism defense community."
Even farmers who see themselves perennially under siege from government regulations, weather and the laws of supply and demand say there may be a problem.
"In terms of immediate threats to agriculture, we've got bigger fish to fry," said Dennis Stolte, a deputy director of governmental relations for the American Farm Bureau. "But I do think terrorist activities directed at the food supply are a legitimate concern. I think we can make the case for more good solid surveillance."
"It's a great problem," said Dr. Drew Richardson, a special assistant in the Federal Bureau of Investigation's laboratory division in Quantico, who is former chief of the FBI's Hazardous Materials Response Unit.
"During the 1980s we saw cyanide placed in both food and pharmaceuticals numerous times" by disgruntled or disturbed individuals, he said. That led the food and drug industry to develop tamper-proof packaging.
Crops and stockyards full of animals could have just as easily been contaminated or infected with disease-causing organisms, he added. "You can imagine the havoc that sort of thing could have caused."
Whether or not any attempts have been made to blight crops or taint livestock with deadly diseases is not clear.
"There have been none that have gone to the stage of prosecution," said Richardson, who investigated a religious cult's use of poison gases to kill 12 people and injure thousands others in a Tokyo subway in 1995.
But Richardson and others said a German conspiracy in the United States that inoculated draft horses bound for Europe in World War I caused many of the animals to die during shipment across the Atlantic. No one knew the cause until discovering it in German records years later.
A case in a rural Oregon county in 1984 offers a small-scale example of what could happen by contaminating a portion of the nation's food supply, Richardson said. A cult there tried to rig a local election by dumping salmonella into the salad bars of 10 local restaurants a day or two before Election Day. The goal was to keep townspeople from voting so their candidate would win.
Like salmonella, a bacterium that causes a variety of diseases and intestinal disorders, many naturally occurring agents could be used to destroy crops, livestock and even people.
"Hoof and Mouth disease could destroy whole populations of species in this country in just a couple of days," Richardson said. "It's pretty myopic to think about terrorism only against people."
A major disruption of agricultural production "could take us out of the world market" and trigger a variety of side effects, said Dr. David Huxsoll, dean of veterinary science at Louisiana State University. "We wouldn't have money to pay for oil."
As an example of what a disruption in the food supply could do, Frazier likes to point to a natural outbreak of a marine toxin in three Eastern Shore tributaries of the Chesapeake Bay in 1997. Pfiesteria immediately made headlines when it caused fish kills and was blamed on creating neurological problems in swimmers and watermen.
The event spawned a series of repercussions, none of them good. Shoppers avoided seafood, watermen in Virginia and Maryland lost millions of dollars when their markets collapsed, and political debates over how to react to the microorganism erupted in both states and the halls of Congress.
"If we had a biological Unibomber, that guy could do an enormous amount of damage if he were well trained," Frazier said.
Crops could be exposed to biological agents in any manner of ways, Frazier said, through contaminated seed distributed through normal channels, by aerial spraying or by simply letting the wind do its work on a drive though the countryside.
Raised in Illinois farm country, Frazier likes the fields of winter wheat that are greening this time of year on Northern Neck farms.
"I'm always impressed how abundant and fine the crops are, but then, of course, when you study this subject, you know how easy it would be for a competent terrorist group to create havoc."

Graphic

 
PHOTO

Load-Date: February 3, 1999


End of Document