U.S., Kenya agree to cooperate
Telegraph Herald (Dubuque, IA)
October 7, 2003 Tuesday


Copyright 2003 Woodward Communications, Inc.
Section: Pg. a5
Length: 659 words
Byline: ASSOCIATED PRESS
Dateline: WASHINGTON
Body


President Bush and Kenyan President Mwai Kibaki celebrated the East African nation's young democracy Monday and pledged to cooperate so Kenya can become a peacemaker in a region plagued by instability and terrorism.
Kibaki asked Bush for more American help in stabilizing Kenya's eastern neighbor, Somalia, a country with no central government and one terrorism experts say is a concern because of the lawlessness there.
"I emphasized that in order to maintain the democratic gains and to sustain the war against terrorism, it is essential that Somalia stabilizes," Kibaki said at a joint news conference with Bush. "In this respect, it is important for the U.S. to increase its involvement in this search for peace in Somalia."
Bush made no commitments in the news conference during Kibaki's state visit - just the fourth Bush has hosted as president, and the first time he had so honored an African leader.
But, Bush said, "The establishment of an effective representative government in Somalia will help stabilize the region and dispel the hopelessness that feeds terror."
Bush and Kibaki also discussed peace efforts in Sudan, a country on the U.S. list of terror-sponsoring states where Kenya is trying to broker an end to 20 years of civil war. Formal negotiations resume this week.
The focus of the meetings was terrorism and Kibaki's efforts to fight it - first, at home.
On Nov. 28, a car bomb killed at least 10 Kenyans and three Israelis at a hotel north of the Indian Ocean port of Mombasa. Minutes before that attack, assailants unsuccessfully tried to shoot down an Israeli charter jet as it was taking off from Mombasa's airport. In 1998, the U.S. embassy was bombed.
Kenya has yet to convict anyone in connection with either of the two big attacks.
, both blamed on al-Qaida.
"Both our nations are threatened by terrorists and both have suffered," Bush said. "Yet we have done more than grieve: We are working together to defeat the terrorists, to cut off their funding, to deny them sanctuary, and to bring them to justice. There can be no compromise with this evil, and the government of Kenya is a vital ally in the ongoing war against terror."
Bush said Kenya has "disrupted terror operations" and arrested an unspecified number of terror suspects, but did not elaborate. U.S. officials believe al-Qaida is active in Kenya, and some have been critical of Kenya's efforts to tackle terrorism.
Kibaki has set up an anti-terrorism unit and pledged to create a national counterterrorism center.
Kibaki said the attacks in his country "have strengthened our resolve to intensify and enhance our cooperation with the United States and the international community in the fight against terrorism."
Bush made no mention in two appearances with Kibaki of the travel warnings that the State Department has in place for Americans considering going to Kenya. Terror alerts issued by the United States and Britain in May angered many Kenyans and sent the all-important tourism sector into a nosedive.
Bush pledged last week to discuss the matter with Kibaki, hinting that his administration was open to lifting the warnings.
He glossed over the issue Monday by saying that "Thousands of our citizens love to travel to Kenya."
And he spoke in glowing terms of the Kenyan landscape, though he scratched Kenya from his itinerary during an Africa trip in July, partly for security concerns. That step further stung many Kenyans.
The two leaders also discussed Kenya's efforts to combat AIDS, which kills an average of 700 Kenyans each day.
Kibaki's visit underscored the strides democracy has made in some parts of Africa after decades of military regimes, dictatorships and the kind of mismanagement that characterized the rule of Kibaki's predecessor, Daniel arap Moi.
When Kibaki led an alliance of opposition parties to a landslide victory Dec. 27, Moi stepped down in compliance with constitutional term limits and power was transferred peacefully - a rarity in Africa.

Load-Date: October 7, 2003


End of Document