U.S. Had Doubts About Lesser Case Against Terror Suspects
The New York Times
May 13, 2005 Friday
Late Edition - Final


Copyright 2005 The New York Times Company
Section: Section A; Column 3; National Desk; Pg. 18
Length: 1039 words
Byline: By ERIC LICHTBLAU
Dateline: WASHINGTON, May 12 
Body


Last December, after a high-profile federal terrorism prosecution in Detroit collapsed amid accusations of government misconduct, the Justice Department resorted to a backup plan. Prosecutors brought much less serious charges of insurance fraud against a pair of one-time terror suspects from Morocco, accusing the men of falsely reporting injuries in a minor car accident. 
 Prosecutors said at the time that they viewed the insurance scam as a serious offense. But internal Justice Department memorandums show that senior prosecutors had serious doubts about the strength of the case and recommended against bringing it, only to have the department go ahead with the lesser charges.
 Bringing the fraud case ''would appear to be vindictive,'' a senior federal prosecutor in Detroit wrote in an e-mail memorandum to senior Justice Department officials in 2003. The same prosecutor wrote that the F.B.I. believed that the move would harm counterterrorism efforts among Muslims and ''may actually encourage extremists.''
 The e-mail messages shed light on the internal wrangling in a case that many critics of the Justice Department see as a low mark in its pursuit of terrorism prosecutions since the Sept. 11 attacks. 
 Some lawyers involved in the case also contend that the department should have turned over the material to the defense under rules of discovery in criminal cases, which generally require prosecutors to divulge exculpatory material.
 The e-mail messages were provided to The New York Times by an official in the case who asked for anonymity because of a judge's order against talking to the news media about the case and pending criminal investigations in the case. 
 When asked about the Justice Department e-mail messages earlier, Richard M. Helfrick, a defense lawyer in the case, said earlier this week that he was unaware of the messages and that prosecutors had not given him access to the material as part of the discovery process in the pending fraud case against his client. 
 ''This is certainly material we would like to have seen,'' said Mr. Helfrick, an assistant public defender representing Karim Koubriti, one of two men charged with fraud in the case. ''To the extent those e-mails contain exculpatory information about the case, the government has withheld it at its own peril.''
 Mr. Helfrick said the Justice Department's internal debate confirmed his suspicions that prosecutors pursued the fraud case only after the collapse of the terror case became a political embarrassment. 
 ''This isn't a case that ordinarily would even have been brought,'' or would have been handled through a pretrial diversion program, he said. 
 The question of whether the e-mail material was improperly withheld from the defense is a particularly sensitive one in the Detroit case. That same issue helped to derail the original terrorism charges against Mr. Koubriti and three other men accused of organizing a terror cell and plotting attacks against American targets. Theirs was the first terrorism prosecution brought after the Sept. 11 attacks.
 The Justice Department had the terrorism charges withdrawn last year after acknowledging that prosecutors failed to turn over internal government communications and other material that could have aided the defendants in arguing that they were not planning terrorist attacks. 
 In a meeting with local reporters in Detroit, Deputy Attorney General James Comey apologized last week for the government's mishandling of the case, and the United States attorney's office in Detroit recently gave an award to a local prosecutor who re-investigated the terror case and worked to have it thrown out.
 The award angered supporters of an original federal prosecutor in the case, Richard Convertino. They maintain that the Justice Department has sought to ''scapegoat'' Mr. Convertino for decisions and missteps that reached the highest levels of the department in Washington.
 Stephen Kohn, a Washington lawyer representing Mr. Convertino in a civil suit he has brought against the Justice Department over his removal from the case, said the e-mail communications suggested that ''you had prosecutors in Washington talking about pursuing a case that they knew may not be valid.''
 ''This wasn't a case where Rick Convertino was drumming up a charge,'' Mr. Kohn said.
 Justice Department officials in Washington and Detroit declined to comment on the e-mail communications, citing the communications blackout a federal judge imposed in the case. 
 Some prosecutors said they did not believe that the department was obligated to give the defense the material because it constituted internal deliberations and ''work product'' exempt from discovery. 
 But Abraham Abramovsky, a law professor at Fordham University who has studied discovery rules, said the issue was a ''gray area'' because the e-mail communications discussed evidentiary issues that could conceivably factor into the guilt or innocence of the defendants.
 In the e-mail messages, sent in May 2003, Justice Department prosecutors in Detroit and Washington discussed what was described as a ''Detroit contingency plan'' if the four defendants were acquitted on the terrorism charges then pending against them. 
 One option prosecutors in Washington pushed was to proceed with the fraud charges in the insurance scheme and approach defense lawyers about a plea bargain to have the terror suspects deported quickly.
 ''A quick plea, sentence and deport would alleviate unpleasant blowback and get the sleepers out of the U.S.,'' a prosecutor in Washington wrote. 
 Prosecutors in Detroit were skeptical. Alan Gershel, a senior prosecutor in the United States attorney's office there, wrote that the authorities could have problems proving the fraud case, that the money involved was relatively little, that it would appear ''vindictive'' and that the F.B.I. believed it ''will actually have a significant negative consequence'' by potentially harming relationships with Detroit's large Muslim population. 
 The Justice Department went ahead with the fraud charges last December. One defendant, Ahmed Hannan, agreed to plead guilty and is to be deported this month. Mr. Koubriti is living in a halfway house in Detroit while he awaits trial.


http://www.nytimes.com

Graphic

 
Photo: Richard Convertino was a prosecutor of the original terror case. (Photo by Associated Press)                                                 

Load-Date: May 13, 2005


End of Document