U.S. Asks Syria to Curb Group Tied to Terrorism
The New York Times
April 2, 1989, Sunday, Late City Final Edition


Copyright 1989 The New York Times Company
Section: Section 1; Part 1, Page 18, Column 5; Foreign Desk
Length: 780 words
Byline: By ELAINE SCIOLINO, Special to the New York Times
Dateline: WASHINGTON, April 1
Body


The United States has asked Syria to curb the activities of a Palestinian organization based in Damascus because of the group's involvement in terrorism, State and Defense Department officials say.
The United States Ambassador, Edward P. Djerejian, has delivered several private messages to Foreign Minister Farouk al-Sharaa of Syria and other Foreign Ministry officials since early January, shortly after the Dec. 17 terrorist bombing of a Pan Am jumbo jet over Scotland.
The messages have been linked in part to other incidents involving the group, the Popular Front for the Liberation of Palestine, General Command, but have gained new urgency because of mounting concern in Washington over circumstantial evidence that indicates the organization may have been responsible for the bombing.
Senior Bush Administration officials have stated that the United States has not yet made firm conclusions about who was responsible for the bombing, which killed 259 people on board and 11 on the ground.
''We have asked the Syrians to control the P.F.L.P.-G.C. and to terminate its terrorist activities,'' a State Department official said. ''We have also asked them to investigate the Pan Am bombing and have said that if the P.F.L.P.-G.C. is implicated, the United States would expect President Assad to live up to his commitments by punishing any terrorists and taking appropriate steps against the organization.''
 
'A Menace to the World'
A senior Defense Department official portrayed the American demarches more bluntly. ''We have told them that the group is a general menace to the world and shouldn't function in Syria,'' the official said.
President Hafez al-Assad of Syria has assured the United States in the past that he would not tolerate terrorists on Syrian territory, but Syrian officials have insisted in their replies to the American appeals that the Popular Front group is not involved in terrorism.
The United States has not specifically asked Syria to expel the group from Syrian territory, as it did with the Abu Nidal organization, the Palestinian terrorist group that took responsibility for the Rome and Vienna airport bombings in 1985 and now operates out of Tripoli, Libya, the State Department official said.
But Administration officials acknowledge that if the Popular Front group's involvement in the Pan Am bombing is decisively proven, the United States will be compelled to force the issue.
The United States has little leverage over Syria, whose relationship with the group is complicated by the fact that the organization is basically a Syrian creation, receives its financing and weapons from Syria and Libya and is headed by Ahmed Jabril, a former Syrian Army captain. His group is one of several factions that strongly opposes what they view as a policy of compromise toward Israel pursued by Yasir Arafat, the leader of the Palestine Liberation Organization.
 
Jebril Linked to Syria
A recent report by the State Department's counterterrorism bureau says Mr. Jabril is ''closely allied with, supported by and probably receives direction from Syria.''
The United States has also made it clear that Syria can be a responsible player in the Arab-Israeli peace process if an organization like the Popular Front group is firmly controlled.
''You tell us you want to be players and involved in the peace process, but hosting a group like the P.F.L.P.-G.C. is not consistent with that,'' a senior Administration official said in describing the message that Washington wants to convey to Damascus.
The United States has long been concerned about the Damascus-based group, but that concern had been tempered by the group's quiescence in recent years. The situation changed in October, when the West German authorities discovered a bomb similar to the device used in the Pan Am bombing in a raid on a group cell in Frankfurt.
As part of its appeals, the United States asked both West Germany and Japan to press the Syrians to control the group. According to the Pentagon, the headquarters of the Japanese Red Army, a terrorist group, is in the Lebanese Bekaa valley, which is largely under Syrian control.
 
Germans Express Concern
The West Germans have expressed their concern to Syria because of the Frankfurt arrests, but it unclear whether the Japanese have also weighed in, State Department officials said.
In early March, the United States condemned Mr. Jabril's threat to carry out the death threat issued by Iran's religious leader, Ayatollah Ruhollah Khomeini, against the British novelist Salman Rushdie. At the time, the State Department called on the Syrian Government to ''take appropriate action to ensure that the P.F.L.P.-G.C. does not follow through on this threat.''


End of Document