U.S. expects record for refusing sanctuary; Experts blame both terrorism, obsolete asylum program
Telegraph Herald (Dubuque, IA)
September 22, 2003 Monday


Copyright 2003 Woodward Communications, Inc.
Section: Pg. c5
Length: 1037 words
Byline: ASSOCIATED PRESS
Dateline: NEW YORK
Body


Those huddled masses yearning to breathe free shouldn't hold their breath waiting for passage to America, which is setting a new record this year for refusing sanctuary to eligible asylum-seekers.
The United States will admit about 25,000 refugees by the end of the current budget year, a low for a nation founded by people fleeing persecution. Experts blame both terrorism fears and an obsolete asylum program that still lists "Soviets" as one of the top five nationalities that deserve U.S. protection.
The total number of resettlements as of Sept. 16 - the current fiscal year concludes at the end of this month - is only half the 50,000 admissions quota approved by President Bush for 2003. That ceiling itself was a new low.
"We're seeing a total deterioration," said Joel Charny, an analyst for Refugees International, a Washington-based lobby group.
Refugee resettlement specialists see signs that the 2004 quotas, which are due to be determined by the White House in mid-October, won't grow. A State Department briefing with Congressional immigration staffers this week left some attendants with strong indications that refugee quotas would stay low or drop lower.
U.S. officials say the program is in transition, and wars in Iraq and Afghanistan, the tightening of domestic security measures, a lack of U.S. resettlement staffers and a refugee-admission criteria based on Cold War-era thinking are to blame for the sharp dip.
One example of why the United States will fall short of reaching its quota: Roughly 6,000 Afghan refugees cleared for admittance to the United States suddenly find themselves facing repatriation to a country that is under U.S. control, but still highly unstable.
Arthur Dewey, Undersecretary of State for Population, Refugees and Migration, said that a program conceived in 1980 - when the primary sources of refugees came from Southeast Asia and the then-Soviet Union - now must concentrate on about 80 areas of conflict. And this comes at a time when the new, terror-driven Department of Homeland Security has seized control of who gets into this immigrant nation.
Dewey said his critics know the constraints U.S. refugee officials faced. He noted that they were able to at least relocate large numbers of refugees to less-dangerous areas of West and East Africa, and that an asylum program is in no danger of disappearing.
"We will find the resources to continue it and Congress will make sure of that," Dewey told The Associated Press in an interview this week.
The Sept. 11, 2001 terror attacks prompted Washington to slash refugee admissions for three straight years, accelerating a steady decline in the refugee resettlement program originally designed to harbor escapees from the Communist side of the Cold War
But the superpower standoff ended with the dissolution of the Soviet Union in December 1991, and the resulting power vacuums led to ethnic and religious fighting that have even exceeded the great population upheavals of the first two world wars.
An estimated 34 million people are either refugees or displaced within the often-fragile borders of their own countries. Since 1990, one in every 100 people has had to flee his or her homeland.
In an era in which the administration has defined as a "war on terrorism," few members of Congress are pounding podiums to demand that the country open its doors wider to foreigners. More typical is legislation sponsored U.S. Rep. Gresham Barrett, R-S.C., who recently introduced a broad bill meant to keep immigrants from any "known terrorist state" from entering the United States.
Most active in an effort to restore refugee levels are U.S. Sens. Edward Kennedy, D-Mass., and Sam Brownback, R-Kan. Brownback said Bush, a fellow Republican, has to re-light the Statue of Liberty's welcoming beacon.
"September 11, 2001 made it clear that the refugee admissions program had to be made as secure as possible. Now that the Administration has had two years to institute important new security measures, I hope that the decade-long trend of decay in the refugee admissions program can be reversed so we can reaffirm America's tradition of welcoming those fleeing persecution," Brownback said in a statement responding to an AP query.
The U.S.S.R. dissolved on Jan. 1, 1992, yet that year was a high point for refugees during the decade - 142,000, with nearly half allotted to a Soviet republic that no longer existed. The ceiling and admissions dropped by roughly half during the eight years of the Clinton administration, then more sharply in the first two years of the Bush presidency.
The ceiling was 90,000 in fiscal 2000, then dropped 10,000 for each of the following two years, with the current ceiling 50,000. Admissions were lower, particularly for 2002 when the ceiling was 70,000 and 26,000 were resettled, according to the State Department.
Advocacy groups and agencies that rely on government contracts to resettle refugees are clamoring for not only greater ceilings - at least 70,000 for the coming year - but also for the administration to at least approach meeting those numbers. Dewey said the 2004 refugee quota is still very much up in the air.
The State Department undersecretary and the pro-refugee forces agree that the structure of asylum is outmoded. There are essentially three categories of refugee:
- Priority 1: Individual cases of persecution.
- Priority 2: Populations of special concern to the United States - currently Vietnamese, Cubans, "Soviets," Iranians and Somalis.
- Priority 3: The relatives of people already granted asylum. The countries included here are Burundi, Sudan, the Congo and the neighboring Republic of the Congo.
"In fact, 90 percent of the world's population cannot be considered for asylum in the United States," under those rules, said Hiram Ruiz, a spokesman for the U.S. Committee for Refugees and its resettlement arm, Immigration and Refugees Services of America.
Dewey said he would support opening that third priority - reuniting families - to all countries. But he said "we have to measure our desires" with the Homeland Security Department's scrutiny of foreigners. He said that category has a fraud rate between 40 percent and 60 percent with people claiming blood relations that don't exist.

Load-Date: September 22, 2003


End of Document