U.S. Position Could Thwart Pursuit of Terrorism Lawsuits
New York Sun (Archive)
December 17, 2003 Wednesday


Copyright 2003 The New York Sun, Two SL, LLC
Section: NATIONAL; Pg. 4
Length: 770 words
Byline: By ELI LAKE Staff Reporter of the Sun
Dateline: WASHINGTON
Body


The Bush administration this week may have made it more difficult for victims of state-sponsored terrorism to collect damages from these regimes, some lawyers for such cases told The New York Sun.
On December 15, the State and Justice departments argued in the U.S. Court of Appeals for the District of Columbia that a federal law Americans have used to sue foreign governments only applies to individuals and not the states that employ them.
The federal prosecutors made the argument at the request of the court's three-judge panel hearing Elizabeth A. Cicippio-Puelo v. Islamic Republic of Iran, a case where the district court ruled in favor of Iran and against the children and brother of Joseph Cicippio, who was held hostage by the Iran-supported Hezbollah in 1986.
The American government argued that the amendment to the Foreign Sovereign Immunities Act named after Alisa Flatow, the American student murdered by a terror attack in Israel on April 9, 1995,"creates a private right of action against foreign government officials, but not against foreign governments, for those acts."
Should the appeals court accept this interpretation, several cases pending before American courts against Libya and Iran in particular could be filed under laws that would provide more modest damage awards and in some cases could be thrown out altogether.
"The significance of the State Department argument this week is that if it is accepted by the courts it could leave American victims of terrorism uncertain of what law would govern their claims and their damages," said Dan Wolf, a lawyer who represents American citizens who were taken hostage and held as human shields by Saddam Hussein's government in the first Gulf War.
Mr. Wolf, a former legal adviser at the State Department, said that the Flatow amendment was often cited in many cases against state sponsors of terrorism because it "would ensure you of having access to various forms of damages you would might otherwise not have in an American court."
The State Department has long opposed the series of legislation signed into law between 1996 and 2002 that allows American citizens to sue those countries considered state sponsors of terrorism.
Despite President Clinton's support in 1996 for the initial changes in the law included in the Anti-Terrorism and Effective Death Penalty Act, Foggy Bottom lobbied against it, according to Gary Schiffman, a staff member for Senator Mack, a Republican of Florida, who was a lead drafter of the bill at the time.
A professor of International Law at George Washington University Law School, Sean Murphy, said American diplomats are concerned about cases against terrorist states because it has created a rush to find assets associated with these countries that would otherwise be protected by treaties and agreements America has already signed.
"We are seeing a series of cases where particular victims of terrorism got to the court first and obtained huge compensatory and punitive damages. They are then going around and trying to enforce those judgments against all sorts of government assets, some of which are protected under particular international obligations," he said.
One such agreement is the 1981 Algiers Accord, which created a special claims tribunal in The Hague to settle disputes between Iranian and American entities. Iranian assets have been sought by many plaintiffs in suits against Iran and in 2001, the Clinton administration paid off a group of such individuals, including the Flatow family, in American appropriations spent against assets that remain frozen at the Treasury Department.
Some lawyers find the administration's argument made this week fanciful.
"The congressmen and senators who wrote the 1996 law had absolutely no doubt whatsoever that the purpose of the legislation was to create a private cause of action by individuals who are victims of terrorism against their state tormentors," said the lawyer who originated the first lawsuit against Libya over the Pan Am 103 bombing, Allan Gerson. Mr. Gerson is co-consul for over 2,000 families of the victims of September 11.
"As a lawyer representing people who have been killed, maimed, and tortured by these countries, I find it extremely troubling that President Bush's State Department and Justice Department would implicitly support terrorist states in these cases but also take positions in court that are contrary to the clear dictates of Congress and the law," attorney Stuart Newberger told the Sun.
Mr. Newberger represents people suing the Libyan government in three separate cases and over twenty cases against the Islamic Republic of Iran.

Load-Date: December 17, 2003


End of Document