U.S., U.N. fall short in defining terrorism
St. Louis Post-Dispatch (Missouri)
May 29, 2005 Sunday
FIVE STAR LIFT EDITION


Copyright 2005 St. Louis Post-Dispatch, Inc.
Section: NEWSWATCH; Pg. B4
Length: 1253 words
Byline: BY VICTOR T. LE VINE Special to the Post-Dispatch
Body


Every April the State Department is required by law to provide Congress -- and the public -- a complete report on terrorism around the world. It has done so since the mid-1980s, publishing what amounts to an annual mini-encyclopedia of terrorism, "Patterns of Global Terrorism," which last year came to 181 pages.
The report released last year, which covered 2003, was something of an embarrassment because it understated some statistics on terrorist incidents, which had to be subsequently corrected.
Apparently on orders from Secretary of State Condoleezza Rice, this year's report (for 2004) was issued in two parts: the first from the State Department, containing the usual country reports and listing of the most important terrorist groups, and the second under the imprint of the National Counterterrorism Center, containing the usual month-by-month chronology and statistical roundup. Together, the 2005 reports came to 216 pages.
This year's report, like most of those preceding it, is informative, useful and pretty comprehensive. The big problem is that the definition of terrorism upon which the report is constructed is itself inadequate, and hence doesn't carry the report far enough. 
The difficulty lies in this part of the international terrorism definition: "The term 'terrorism' means premeditated, politically motivated violence perpetrated against noncombatant targets by subnational groups or clandestine agents."
Better, but still defective, is wording that surfaced this year when the United Nations, mother of well over a dozen anti-terrorism treaties and conventions, actually defined terrorism for the first time. U.N. Secretary-General Kofi Annan's March 21 U.N. reform package includes this description: "any action constitutes terrorism if it is intended to cause death or bodily harm to civilians or noncombatants with the purpose of intimidating a population or compelling a Government or an international organization to do or to abstain from doing any act."
What's missing?
First, while Annan's definition leaves open the possibility that governments can, and do, terrorize their own people (besides, I like "frightening": better than "intimidating" since, as Lenin so aptly put it, "The purpose of terrorism is to produce terror"), the U.S. definition focuses only on acts by subnational groups or clandestine agents. Nowhere in the U.S. reports is there any hint of the fact that governments terrorize populations -- usually their own citizens -- much more often and on a much greater scale than do their opponents. Witness (for example) the Soviet Gulag, the killing fields of the Khmer Rouge, the slaughter by the Sudanese military and their conjoined militias in Darfur, the Argentine generals' "dirty war" during the 1970s, the ethnic cleansing in Kosovo, the actions of death squads in Latin America, and the daily extra-judicial murders, torture and intimidation of opponents by dictatorial regimes in Africa and elsewhere. And Annan, while asserting that terrorism is a war crime, undermined his definition by arguing that "state terrorism" no longer has any real meaning. 
Add all that up for just one year and you'd have not just one 216 page report, but all the pages of the State Department's annual Human Rights Country Reports, plus the annual reports of such organizations as Human Rights Watch and Amnesty International -- in effect, a small library on national and international terrorism.
Some may object by pointing out that the State Department's report is about "international" -- not "national" -- terrorism. True, but if state-sponsored, state-directed terrorism was once considered nobody's business but that of the perpetrator state, it is not so any longer: Almost all state-terrorism now resonates internationally -- and may in fact occasion humanitarian intervention if the violation is so gross as to "offend the conscience of mankind." Moreover, anti-government terrorism rarely if ever now stays neatly within territorial boundaries, as shown in anti-government terrorism in Iraq, Colombia, Chechnya, Sudan, Uganda, Spain, India, Nepal, Congo, Indonesia, Morocco, Egypt, Israel/Palestine, Lebanon, Turkey, etc.
I think it patently clear that Annan avoids including state terrorism in his definition because he doesn't want to stir the ire of all those states, great and small, that continue to practice it. Its absence from the American definition may well come from a similar wish to avoid giving offense to some of our friends, and perhaps because we fear being accused by our enemies of practicing state terrorism.
The second problem is that both definitions define the object of terrorism as "noncombatant targets" (U.S. Code), and "civilians or noncombatants" (U.N.). This is pretty standard in definitions of terrorism, but it completely overlooks the fact that some terrorist groups may have initially targeted economic installations or unoccupied buildings before targeting humans.
Third, both definitions fail to include elements that give terrorism its proper, and actual, scope. As far as violence is concerned, all that's required for the terrorism label, according to the U.S. definition, is that it be "premeditated, politically motivated" and targeted against noncombatants. 
Both definitions supply only two-thirds of the terrorism equation -- that is, politically motivated perpetrators, and targets that are killed, injured, or destroyed, ostensibly (at least in the U.N. definition) in order to create an effect on third parties. The U.N. definition identifies those third parties as "a population," a "Government" or "an international organization." The U.S. definition says nothing about that last third of the equation, the audience intended to be terrorized by the violence, and, by neglecting this point, the definition avoids the possibility of identifying populations or people frightened by terrorism sponsored by or initiated by a government. The U.N.'s definition refers to "a population," but if you take Annan at his word, it's only populations terrorized by anti-government terrorists or anti-international-organization terrorists that count.
Since both definitions fail to identify the most prolific violators of human rights -- governments -- and their most frequent targets -- their own people -- they leave such regimes free to continue terrorizing their citizens and absolve the United States, and the United Nations, of responsibility for doing anything about such situations. This may fit the United States' international politics, but it brands our "War on Terrorism," at the very least, as an exercise in hypocrisy.
One can readily understand why it is so difficult to label terrorists if they are agents of the state, and, if the U.N. can't bring itself to label what's going on in Darfur as genocidal terrorism, I can see why it can't offer a definition of terrorism that covers that ongoing horror. In the U.S., the politics that formerly exempted from condemnation "anti-Communist" friends and allies, and that today exempt "friends" and "allies" in the "War on Terrorism," regardless of their human rights records, leave blank the very parts of our official definition of terrorism that might identify, or worse, embarrass them.
As I indicated above, our new international terrorism reports are useful and interesting and informative, but don't go far enough to cover or define the subject. Unfortunately, those gaps expose the moral shortcomings of our vaunted War on Terrorism, and if our government isn't embarrassed, I am.

Notes

 MY VIEW  Victor T. Le Vine a Professor Emeritus of Political Science at Washington University in St. Louis. 

Graphic

 
PHOTO
 Photo by KAREL PRINSLOO / THE ASSOCIATED PRESS - A Sudanese refugee cries upon reaching the Chad border last summer after fleeing political violence in Darfur. Definitions of terrorism often fail to label actions by states as terrorism.  THREE STAR PHOTO  Photo by EVAN SCHNEIDER / AFP / GETTY IMAGES - U.N. Secretary General Kofi Annan (left) listens Saturday in Labado, in southern Darfur, as a woman describes an air attack. Annan was visiting Labado, which was abandoned by its 60,000 inhabitants when it was attacked in December 2004; about 30,000 have returned.  

Load-Date: May 29, 2005


End of Document