U.S. ACCUSES COLOMBIAN GROUP OF TERRORISM
Pittsburgh Post-Gazette (Pennsylvania)
September 11, 2001 Tuesday
SOONER EDITION


Copyright 2001 P.G. Publishing Co.
Section: NATIONAL,
Length: 417 words
Byline: KEN GUGGENHEIM, THE ASSOCIATED PRESS
Dateline: WASHINGTON
Body


The Bush administration designated a right-wing Colombian paramilitary organization as a terrorist group yesterday as Secretary of State Colin Powell headed to Peru and Colombia to support anti-drug efforts and endorse democratic standards.
 The designation of the United Self-Defense Forces as a terrorist group was based on "an exhaustive review of the AUC's violent activities over the past two years," Powell said in a statement, using the Spanish initials for the group.
 Financial support for the group is illegal under the designation and American financial institutions are required to block its assets.
Powell said the AUC has carried out numerous acts of terrorism, including the massacre of hundreds of civilians, the displacement of entire villages and the kidnaping of political figures.
 A State Department spokesman, Philip Reeker, said AUC was "increasingly collaborating with narco-traffickers."
 Hinting that a $1.3 billion U.S. aid package will be increased, Reeker said, "We continually review our policy to ensure it remains effective and reflects the evolving situation."
 At the same time, Reeker said Powell in his talks with government officials in Colombia would underscore a need for the government to improve its human rights record "in terms of severing all ties between security forces and paramilitary groups."
 Powell's three-day trip to Peru and Colombia, where democracy has been under fire, was designed to show that U.S. interests in the hemisphere go beyond Mexico, where President Bush's attention has been focused.
 Powell will attend an Organization of American States foreign ministers meeting today to approve a charter setting democratic standards for the region.
 Powell's meeting with President Alejandro Toledo will mark U.S. support for Peru's democratic transition. Toledo's election followed the 10-year presidency of Alberto Fujimori, forced from office by a corruption scandal after winning a third term in widely criticized elections.
 Peru is expected to ask the United States to resume U.S.-backed anti-drug flights that were suspended after the Peruvian air force mistakenly shot down an American missionary plane in April, killing a woman and her infant daughter. The plane was initially identified as a possible drug flight by a CIA-operated surveillance plane.
 Tomorrow, Powell will meet with Colombian President Andres Pastrana and other leaders in Bogota to discuss the country's guerrilla war and anti-drug efforts under a $1.3 billion U.S. aid package.

Load-Date: September 12, 2001


End of Document