U.S. PROBE OF LIBYA ATTACK UNCOVERS LINK TO AL-QAIDA; SIEGE OF FACILITIES THAT KILLED 4 CALLED TERRORIST ATTACK
Pittsburgh Post-Gazette
September 28, 2012 Friday
SOONER EDITION


Copyright 2012 P.G. Publishing Co.
Section: WORLD; Pg. A-6
Length: 771 words
Byline: Greg Miller, The Washington Post
Body


U.S. intelligence agencies have determined that the attack on the U.S. mission in Libya involved a small number of militants with ties to al-Qaida in North Africa but see no indication that the terrorist group directed the assault, U.S. officials said Thursday.
The determination reflects an emerging consensus among analysts at the CIA and other agencies that has contributed to a shift among senior Obama administration officials toward describing the siege of U.S. facilities in Benghazi as a terrorist attack.
U.S. intelligence officials said the composition of the militant forces involved in the assault has become clearer over the past week and that analysts now believe that two or three fighters affiliated with al-Qaida in the Islamic Maghreb were involved.
"There are people who at least have some association with AQIM," said a senior U.S. intelligence official who added that "it's not so direct that you would say AQIM as an organization planned and carried this out."
Instead, U.S. officials said a lesser-known Islamist group, Ansar al-Sharia, played a much larger role in sending fighters and providing weapons for the attack, which killed the U.S. ambassador and three other Americans. U.S. officials have previously cited suspicion of al-Qaida connections to the attack.
The intelligence picture assembled so far indicates that militants had been preparing an assault on the U.S. compound in Benghazi for weeks but were so disorganized that, after the battle started, they had to send fighters to retrieve heavier weapons.
Further, U.S. intelligence officials said they think the attack was not timed to coincide with the Sept. 11, 2001, anniversary. Instead, the officials said, the assault was set in motion after protesters scaled the walls of the U.S. Embassy in Cairo as part of an Egyptian protest of an amateur anti-Islamic YouTube video.
"There's never been any intelligence, nor any I'm aware of now, that indicated this was a plot planned months in advance to get turned on on 9/11," said an Obama administration official. The emerging scenario, the official said, "is that extremists in the region had cased out and hoped to target U.S. facilities in Benghazi for some time. When they saw what was happening in Cairo, that influenced their timing."
The officials spoke on the condition of anonymity to describe the preliminary assessments of analysts involved in an ongoing investigation of the Benghazi attack that involves the FBI, the CIA and other agencies.
The question of whether the attack was a pre-planned act of terrorism has become entangled in the politics of the ongoing presidential campaign. Republicans have accused the administration of being reluctant to attribute the Benghazi assault to terrorism, suggesting it could make President Barack Obama vulnerable on a perceived foreign policy strength -- the success of the campaign against al-Qaida -- and raise questions about his handling of the rise of Islamist factions in the aftermath of the Arab Spring.
The State Department said Thursday that it was pulling more American staff from the U.S. Embassy in Tripoli out of concern for their safety. A State Department official described the reduction as temporary and said the embassy was not being closed. The State Department would not say how many people are leaving or how many will stay.
A message on the embassy website Thursday told U.S. citizens in Libya to avoid areas of the city where protests are planned and warned that "even demonstrations that are meant to be peaceful can turn violent and unpredictable. You should avoid them if at all possible."
After Obama administration officials initially characterized the assault as a protest that turned violent, Secretary of State Hillary Rodham Clinton on Wednesday became the highest-ranking official to call the attack an act of terrorism. In remarks at the United Nations, Ms. Clinton said terrorists were "working with other violent extremists to undermine the democratic transitions under way in North Africa, as we tragically saw in Benghazi."
Ms. Clinton and others had avoided that term until the director of the National Counterterrorism Center, Matthew Olsen, testified before Congress last week that the ambassador and others "died as a result of a terrorist attack."
At the time, Mr. Olsen said analysts were examining "indications that individuals involved in the attack may have had connections to al-Qaida or al-Qaida's affiliates."
U.S. analysts have combed through intercepted communications, pictures and video from the scene and information from sources, including suspects taken into custody by the Libyan government.

Load-Date: September 28, 2012


End of Document