U.S. EXPELS LIBYANS AND CLOSES MISSION, CHARGING TERRORISM
The New York Times
May 7, 1981, Thursday, Late City Final Edition


Copyright 1981 The New York Times Company
Section: Section A; Page 1, Column 3; Foreign Desk
Length: 847 words
Byline: By BERNARD GWERTZMAN, Special to the New York Times
Dateline: WASHINGTON, May 6
Body


The United States ordered today that Libya close its diplomatic mission in Washington and remove the mission staff from the country. It cited ''a wide range of Libyan provocations and misconduct, including support for international terrorism.''
A statement by the State Department said that the United States was troubled by ''a general pattern of unacceptable conduct'' by Libya, which it said ''is contrary to internationally accepted standards of diplomatic behavior.''
Dean Fischer, the State Department spokesman, declined to give details. But officials said that the Reagan Administration had a list of complaints, including alleged efforts by Libyans to murder opponents of Libya's revolutionary leader, Col. Muammar el-Qaddafi, and Libyan activities in Chad, the Sudan and Egypt.
US expels Libyans and closes mission, charging terrorismLibyans Aiding Radicals
Since seizing power in 1969 from King Idris, Colonel Qaddafi has promoted a strong anti-Israel line. He has supported radicals and revolutionaries in many countries, provided asylum to terrorists and hijackers and developed close relations with Moscow, purchasing vast amounts of Soviet arms. Colonel Qaddafi's most recent visit to Moscow took place last week.
The Washington order, which requires the Libyans to close their mission and withdraw their personnel in five days, fell short of a formal break in diplomatic relations, Mr. Fischer said.
He noted, however, that it reduced United States ties with Libya ''to the lowest level consistent with maintenance of diplomatic relations.''
 
U.N. Mission Not Affected
The order does not affect Libya's mission to the United Nations.  Ground work has begun for a 25-story building, on East 48th Street in Manhattan, to house the Libyan mission.
The American Embassy in Tripoli was attacked and burned in December 1979, after the seizure of the American Embassy in Teheran by Iranian militants and the attack on the Grand Mosque in Mecca by Saudi rebels.
All American diplomats were withdrawn from Libya a few months later.  There are still about 2,000 Americans in Libya, working for oil companies there, the State Department spokesman said.  Libya ships 640,000 barrels of oil a day to the United States, about 10 percent of United States imports, he added.
Last year, the United States expelled six Libyans, accusing them of involvement in an international campaign of terror that resulted in murders in London and Rome of Libyans opposed to the Qaddafi regime.
As part of an ideological campaign launched in Libya last year by Colonel Qaddafi, the Libyan diplomatic mission was changed here from an embassy to a People's Bureau. Its head is Dr. Ali el-Houderi, who is listed as secretary of the People's Committee of the People's Bureau.
State Department officials said that about 22 Libyans with diplomatic status were expected to leave the country under the order.  Mr. Fischer said that the United States was willing to allow the Libyans to establish ''an interests section'' in another embassy in Washington, but only if the same status was afforded the United States in Tripoli. Up to now, he said, the Libyans have refused American requests to have another embassy represent Washington.
Because of the latest developments, the State Department also said that it was advising American citizens not to travel or to live in Libya.
 
Cutback in Libya Urged
Asked if the security of the 2,000 oil company employees there was endangered, Mr. Fischer said that the State Department had urged the companies to cut back on their personnel in Libya because of the inability of the United States to protect them.
The statement that was read by Mr. Fischer was apparently meant to convey the Reagan Administration's strongly held views against international terrorism.
It said that ''from the first days of the Administration, both the President and Secretary of State Alexander M. Haig Jr. have made known their very real concern about a wide range of Libyan provocations and misconduct, including support for international terrorism.''
The United States has been deeply concerned about Libya's international activities for some time. It has been worried that the Libyans were serving as an indirect Soviet ''proxy'' in Africa by interfering militarily and politically in various countries.
 
Aims at Chad, Sudan and Egypt
The most prominent intervention was Libya's role in the Chad civil war in which his forces overthrew the French-backed opponents. Libya has threatened the Sudan and Egypt, countries with close ties to the United States, and has tried to win influence in Liberia.
Last May, when six Libyans were expelled from this country, the State Department said that scores of the 4,000 Libyans in the United States, mainly students, had been threatened with ''extermination'' for views opposed to Colonel Qaddafi.
In another Middle East matter, a special Presidential envoy, Philip C. Habib, left Washington on his mission to try and reduce tensions over Lebanon. He is to visit Lebanon, Syria and Israel, and will remain in the area without a date for return, the State Deparment said.


End of Document