U.S. POLICY IS TOO RIGID, SAY EXPERTS IN TERRORISM
St. Louis Post-Dispatch (Missouri)
August 7, 1989, MONDAY, THREE STAR Edition


Copyright 1989 St. Louis Post-Dispatch, Inc.
Section: WAR PAGE; Pg. 1B
Length: 514 words
Byline: Bernd Debusmann 1989, Reuters News Service
Body


WASHINGTON IN LEBANON, THE U.S. government is being advised to tread more softly on its tough ''no concessions'' policy towards extremists so as not to box itself in a corner.  Experts on terrorism say the United States narrows its freedom of action every time it restates a policy that precludes secret deals with kidnappers.  ''We ought not to emphasize this policy too much,'' said Robert Kupperman, a terrorism expert at Washington's Center for Strategic and International Studies.  ''No channels should be closed. There is no reason why there should not be behind-the-scenes efforts, either through intermediaries or private organizations.'' President George Bush repeated his determination not to make concessions after a pro-Iranian group announced it had hanged Marine Col. William Higgins in retaliation for the abduction of a Moslem religious leader by Israeli commandos.  But experts believe the United States has limited room for retaliation to terrorist attacks unless it accepts large civilian casualties in military strikes or adopts the same savage methods used by extremists.  Terrorism expert Robert Hunter said: ''The motto should be talk tough, act flexibly.'' Gene Mastrangelo, head of Business Risks International, said, ''In my opinion, flexibility is the appropriate response.'' The firm is a Washington-based company that advises multinational corporations.  Since the Iran-Contra affair, American officials have interpreted ''no concessions'' with a rigidity some analysts consider counter-productive.  ''After the embarrassment of the Iran-Contra affair, the policy has been restated with the zeal of reformed alcoholics,'' said Brian Jenkins, an expert on international terrorism.
In the Iran-Contra scandal, officials under President Ronald Reagan secretly sold arms to Iran to win the release of American hostages in Lebanon.  Profits from the deal financed the Nicaraguan Contra rebels at a time when Congress barred aid to them.  The California-based RAND corporation last week made public a study on terrorism that described U.S. policy on hostages as dangerously rigid. In contrast, other countries, such as France and West Germany, are believed to have conducted secret deals to obtain the release of hostages in Lebanon.  ''Originally, its (the policy's wording indicated that while the U.S.  government itself would not release prisoners, pay ransom or make other concessions to terrorists holding hostages, it would not actively oppose other governments making concessions to obtain the release of Americans held hostage,'' the study notes.  Since the Iran-Contra affair, the United States had discouraged other governments from making deals to obtain the release of their own nationals and publicly criticized countries that had done so.  Extremist groups in Lebanon hold nine U.S. citizens hostage, several of them since 1985.  RAND predicts that several thousand ''terrorist incidents'' will take place around the world while Bush is in office. Roughly a quarter of them will be directed against American citizens or American facilities abroad.

Load-Date: October 25, 1993


End of Document