U.S. needs support of citizens in War on Terror responses
Herald: Arkansas State University
February 11, 2015 Wednesday


University Wire
Copyright 2015 UWIRE via U-Wire All Rights Reserved
Section: EDITORIALS; Pg. 1
Length: 706 words
Body


For almost two decades, the United States has been the world's leading member in the fight against terror throughout the world. Our reputation as an active force in defending the world from present evil dates all the way back to the Afghanistan war. The United States has been a symbol of the authority over the fight against terrorism-until recently, of course.Within the last couple of years, President Obama has been making different moves involving terrorist threats, leaving bad tastes in the mouths of the American public by slacking on the job the U.S. so bravely took on in the past. Although it is ue that it is President Obama's duty to take these situations on both professionally and accurately, much more has gone on in the past few years than the world has seen previously with terrorism.In the latest terrorist situation in France, we see that the United States is caving in under the pressure that its public brings on it. 
The Charlie Hebdo massacre in Paris took the lives of 10 workers and two police officers over a dispute on a cartoon depicting Muhammad. Such an inhuman crime took France by surprise, and a rally was made in an attempt to bring the world together over the agedy. The United States, however, sent only their ambassador to join in consoling France, while President Obama made the decision to stay out of it. This brought a wave out ouage from U.S. citizens, who are all unaware of the complexities that went in to the decision itself.We even see that the United States no longer has the authority or jurisdiction to take the assertive action it did in the War on Terrorism during the times of Saddam Hussein and Osama Bin Laden, based on the response to the ISIS attacks that have been plaguing the hearts of the world for countless months. While most people would assume that we are no longer being proactive in the War on Terror, people with political knowledge understand that the decisions of the United States are bound by the ties of the world.The United States can only do so much across its own borders, and each decision by both Obama and Congress must be carefully made, so that the U.S. can ensure positive relations with the nations in which the American people wish to defend. The average citizen does not see a disconnection between the terrorist groups and the counies themselves which the terrorist groups are occupying. Unfortunately for most of Congress, the uneducated American sikes again, and we have a wave of ouage over something that should be thought over more carefully.Does the United States continue to do the right thing in the War on Terror? I believe under the circumstances that we are doing just that: the right thing. A lot has been put on the major powers of the world, with rising fears of increased terrorism and uncomfortable tensions caused by the actions and motives of Russia. The United States has a lot of political complexities to tackle in order to get through the international policy of sending oops and weapons into a couny to fight a terrorist organization. In an interview about ISIS, Obama made the motion of a new phase in the attempts to take ISIS down without the use of US oops, according to CSB News.The new phase means that the United States government is taking these terrorist threats into consideration, and is acting upon them the best way they can. Part of Obama's campaign for President in 2008 was to remove oops from the Middle East, which at the time was causing national uproar due to the increasing death rates of soldiers to the terrorists in the area. CBS also quotes Obama's fight against terrorism as saying, "sometimes we don't do it at the speed that keeps up with, you know, the press cycle." This shows Obama's awareness of the people's wants to rid terroristic threats, but he acknowledges the fact that the United States government cannot make these decisions immediately.The U.S. leaders are continuing their fight on terrorism, and will continue enacting their sategy to end the ISIS threat in Middle Eastern counies. With the support of the American people, the members of Congress have a chance to make productive measures that could save the lives of thousands of innocents and put an end to a major terrorist threat.

Load-Date: March 7, 2016


End of Document