U.S. EYES IRANI DEFECTOR'S CLAIM
 Philadelphia Daily News
JUNE 6, 2000 Tuesday LATE SPORTS EDITION


Copyright 2000 Philadelphia Newspapers, LLC  All Rights Reserved


Section: NATIONAL; Pg. 31
Length: 336 words
Byline: Reuters
Dateline: WASHINGTON
Body


The United States said yesterday it stood by Scottish prosecutors trying two Libyans for the bombing of a U.S. airliner in 1988, but vowed to assess fully a defector who says he can prove it was Iran's work.
"Concerning the reported assertion that Iran ordered the Pan Am 103 bombing, we have stated repeatedly that we will follow the evidence wherever it leads," State Department spokesman Philip Reeker told a regular news briefing.
A CBS television report Sunday stated that a senior intelligence service defector had said he possessed documents to prove Iran trained a group of Libyans to stage the bombing.
It sent the jet crashing into the Scottish town of Lockerbie, killing 270 people, including 11 on the ground.
The defector is being debriefed in Turkey by Central Intelligence Agency and others with expertise on the case, one official said on condition of anonymity.
While some of the things he had said had "cast some doubt" on his credibility, he was being taken seriously, the official added.
"We are reviewing what this guy has to say in great detail and so far we have not found him to be incredible," he added.
Reeker said, however, that the United States stood by the facts of the case being presented under Scottish law at Camp Zeist base in the Netherlands. "We believe that case is very solid," he said.
But Reeker also said the U.S. government was following up on the report.
"We became aware of his defection last week and we will carefully assess the credibility of the information he provides," he said.
The State Department has declined to discuss details of the case while it is being tried.
Washington in April left Iran on its list of sponsors of "terrorism" in 1999 despite the ascendancy of reformers who won a sweeping victory in parliamentary elections this past February.
"Although there were signs of political change in Iran in 1999, the actions of certain state institutions in support of terrorist groups made Iran the most active state sponsor of terrorism," the U.S. "terrorism" report said.

Load-Date: January 29, 2002


End of Document