U.S. to Seek Death Penalty In Bombings
The New York Times
May 10, 2000, Wednesday, Late Edition - Final


Copyright 2000 The New York Times Company
Distribution: Metropolitan Desk 
Section: Section B; ; Section B; Page 1; Column 6; Metropolitan Desk ; Column 6; 
Length: 847 words
Byline: By BENJAMIN WEISER 

By BENJAMIN WEISER 
Body


Attorney General Janet Reno has authorized federal prosecutors in Manhattan to seek the death penalty against at least one defendant in the bombings of two United States Embassies in East Africa in 1998, according to defense lawyers in the broad terrorism conspiracy case.
Ms. Reno's decision, which has not been made public, sets the stage for the first death penalty case in the United States involving an act of international terrorism, lawyers said.
The defendant, Mohamed Rashed Daoud al-'Owhali, has been accused of being a passenger in a truck that carried the bomb in the explosion at the American Embassy in Nairobi, Kenya, on Aug. 7, 1998. That bombing, along with a nearly simultaneous explosion at the embassy in Dar es Salaam, Tanzania, killed more than 200 people and wounded more than 4,000.
Mr. al-'Owhali is one of three defendants in custody in New York who are eligible for the death penalty in the bombings; no decision has been made in the cases of the other two. All three have pleaded not guilty.
David I. Bruck, a lawyer for Mr. al-'Owhali, confirmed late yesterday that he had been told of Ms. Reno's decision, which he called "folly."
"The government claims that this young man has already tried to detonate himself into paradise," Mr. Bruck said. "Now it's offering to do the job itself, providing him with a glorious death while the world watches. Is this how to deter terrorism?"
Marvin Smilon, a spokesman for United States Attorney Mary Jo White, declined to comment last night.
Prosecutors have described Mr. al-'Owhali as a would-be suicide bomber in the Nairobi blast. The government has charged that he admitted to investigators that he tossed a dummy grenade at a security guard seconds before the bomb was to go off, and that the bombing was intended as a "martyrdom operation in which he did not expect to survive."
Just last month, Mr. Bruck and another lawyer, Leonard F. Joy, told Judge Leonard B. Sand of United States District Court in Manhattan that their client had ordered them not to go to Washington for a recent meeting with Ms. Reno's staff, where they had intended to argue against the death penalty. The lawyers did not explain their client's decision in court.
Ms. Reno must rule on all requests from federal prosecutors to seek capital punishment.
The three men facing capital charges are to be tried later this year with three others, who could face life in prison, for their roles in the embassy bombings and in what prosecutors say was a worldwide terrorism conspiracy to kill Americans abroad.
The authorities suspect that the conspiracy was masterminded by the Saudi exile Osama bin Laden, who is believed to be living in Afghanistan under the protection of the fundamentalist Taliban.
Mr. Bruck, in his sharp criticism, said Ms. Reno's decision could complicate the government's efforts to win other countries' cooperation in returning Mr. bin Laden for trial because "it implies that the U.S. intends to execute bin Laden, too."
"Since no Muslim country is likely to hand him over to be killed," Mr. Bruck said, "it may really mean that the U.S. has given up on ever getting bin Laden, and has decided to content itself with killing his foot soldiers instead."
Mr. Bruck added: "In our new role as global executioner, we're about to learn the hard way what Israel and England -- countries facing much greater terrorist threats -- have long understood: turning accused terrorists into martyrs only makes a bad situation worse."
Ms. White, the United States attorney in Manhattan, recently sought Ms. Reno's authorization for a death penalty case against a second of the three defendants eligible for the death penalty, Khalfan Khamis Mohamed, who has been accused of a role in the Tanzania explosion. Ms. Reno has not ruled on that request.
In the case of the third defendant, Mohammed Saddiq Odeh, Ms. White has not yet indicated whether she will seek the death penalty. But death penalty experts who have followed the case say they ultimately expect the government to seek the death penalty against all three of the eligible defendants.
Yesterday, Mr. Bruck said he hoped Ms. Reno would reconsider her decision. Mr. al-'Owhali's case had drawn particular attention among legal experts because of the allegations that he wanted to die in the explosion, and his decision to block his lawyers from opposing the death penalty before Ms. Reno's staff.
Earlier, in an unusual strategy, the defense lawyers for all three of the defendants facing capital charges filed a 30-page memorandum with Justice and State Department officials, arguing that seeking the death penalty would harm this country's foreign policy and damage its counterterrorism efforts.
One lawyer in the broader terrorism case said that the death penalty case against Mr. al-'Owhali has been limited by Ms. Reno to those counts charging his participation in the Nairobi bombing, in which more than 200 people were killed. Mr. al-'Owhali was also indicted in the bombing in Tanzania, although prosecutors have not offered evidence publicly of his involvement in that attack.      

http://www.nytimes.com

Load-Date: May 10, 2000


End of Document