U.S. MAY LET IRAQ BUY JETS DESPTE TERRORISM QUESTION
The New York Times
August 6, 1980, Wednesday, Late City Final Edition


Copyright 1980 The New York Times Company
Section: Section A; Page 5, Column 1; Foreign Desk
Length: 556 words
Byline: By BERNARD GWERTZMAN, Special to the New York Times
Dateline: WASHINGTON, Aug. 5
Body


The Carter Administration said today that it was considering approval of the sale of five Boeing jets to Iraq despite that country's support for international terrorism.
The development came a week after a State Department decision not to block the sale of General Electric gas-turbine engines for use in Italian-made warships for Iraq. Both actions have aroused concern on Capitol Hill among legislators opposed to selling equipment with possible military application to countries aiding terrorists.
AN-A
In compliance with a regulation ordered by Congress, President Carter named Iraq, Libya, Southern Yemen and Syria last Dec. 29 as countries that ''have repeatedly provided support for acts of international terrorism.''
Once a country is designated a haven for terrorists, the Export Administration Act requires that special scrutiny be given to sales of aircraft and that Congress be notified before any sales are permitted. Congressional and State Department sources said Iraq Airlines wants to buy two Boeing 747's and three smaller 727's to augment its fleet, which includes Boeings bought before the law was enacted two years ago.
 
Sale Worth $200 Million
An aide to Senator Richard Stone, the Florida Democrat who is chairman of the Foreign Relations subcommittee on the Middle East, said Mr. Stone strongly opposes the sale, valued at about $200 million. Mr. Stone, one of Israel's strongest supporters in the Senate, has already succeeded in winning approval of an amendment to pending foreign aid legislation barring the sale of the engines for the warships.
The United States and Iraq do not have formal diplomatic relations, but they maintain interests sections in each other's capital. Because Iraq is a major oil exporter and has one of the largest military forces in the Persian Gulf, the Administration has tried to persuade the Iraqis to restore relations that were severed in 1967 because of the Middle East war.
David D. Newsom, Under Secretary of State for Political Affairs, said in April that the United States was prepared to resume diplomatic relations. ''With the growing role of our country in the area,'' he said, ''we feel it is important that we have normal relations with every country. Our approaches to Iraq, however, have not met with success.''
American interest in better relations with Iraq has been increased by Iraq's moves to lessen its economic and military dependence on the Soviet Union and by its continuing feud with Iran, officials said.
 
Farm Products Exported to Iraq
United States trade with Iraq has grown substantially in recent years, despite the lack of formal ties. Last year it passed $1 billion, with more than $600 million in American imports, mostly oil, and $500 million in exports, mostly agricultural products and machinery.
Representative Millicent Fenwick, Republican of New Jersey, has been a leader in the fight against selling the planes and engines.  She said today that ''one would have thought that the Administration might have learned that efforts to please those countries are misguided and naive, encouraging them to think that we might not be determined in our opposition to international terrorism.''
John H. Trattner, the State Department spokesman, confirmed that consultations were going on with members of Congress on the plane sale but said no decision had been made.


End of Document