U.S. hasn't yet learned terrorism begets terrorism
The Pantagraph (Bloomington, IL)
March 5, 2003, Wednesday


Copyright 2003 The Pantagraph
Section: Editorial; Pg. A8
Length: 376 words
Body


The Bush administration has exhibited unparalleled incompetence in defining U.S. strategic interests.
Every terrorist attack against Americans, starting in 1979 with the takeover of the U.S. embassy in Iran to the 1985 TWA hijacking in Lebanon, the Achille Lauro incident in 1985 and the horrible murder of disabled passenger Leon Klinghoffer just because he was an American Jew, the Beirut Marine barracks bombing in 1983 and on to 9-11, were claimed acts perpetrated in retaliation for U.S. support of the Israeli treatment of Palestinians.
The United Nations, West Bank missionaries and human rights groups around the world have repeatedly condemned this treatment. The charges include long-term human rights violations on a massive scale, ethnic cleansing, apartheid and unadjudicated claims of war crimes.
The Palestinian dilemma all these years has been ignored for the most part in the Muslim world, which accounts for 20 percent of the world's population and populates the land where most of the world's oil reserves are located. Efforts by the Muslims to generate support for the Palestinian cause amounted to nothing more than grousing and lip service.
Then came 9-11, a strategic attempt by a devious and well-financed opponent of Israel to mobilize the Muslim world. This mobilization would occur only if the Bush administration fell into the trap set by Osama bin Laden, to provoke an overreaction perceived to be anti-Muslim.
Bush is about to fall into that trap by invading Iraq. Bush at first, like his father, leaned on Sharon's right-wing, extremist policies, but was thwarted by the fundamentalist Christian movement. Israel's supporters in the Bush administration by, without evidence, labeling Korea with Israel's enemies, Iran and Iraq, as the "axis of evil," also lead to the unintended consequence of provoking another avoidable crisis.
I expect the end result of this fiasco will be to mobilize support among Muslim extremists to attack American trading and commercial interests overseas, which are fundamentally indefensible targets.
We should learn from the Israeli experience with Hamas. and the French when they. state that the use of the military in fighting terrorism in Algeria just begat more terrorism.
Kenneth E. Baughman
Monticello

Load-Date: March 5, 2003


End of Document