U.S., PAKISTAN WORK ON TENSIONS OVER RAID
Pittsburgh Post-Gazette (Pennsylvania)
May 17, 2011 Tuesday
SOONER EDITION


Copyright 2011 P.G. Publishing Co.
Section: WORLD; Pg. A-4
Length: 564 words
Byline: Saeed Shah, McClatchy Newspapers
Body


ISLAMABAD, Pakistan -- After two weeks of rising acrimony, U.S. and Pakistani officials moved Monday to smooth over tensions triggered by the May 2 Navy SEAL raid that killed Osama bin Laden.
Senate Foreign Relations Committee Chairman John Kerry, calling the U.S.-Pakistani relationship "back on track," said Pakistani authorities had agreed in talks here to return to the United States the wreckage of one of the helicopters used in the raid. A statement by both sides said the U.S. had agreed that any future raid on high-value terrorist targets like bin Laden would include Pakistani participation.
Mr. Kerry, D-Mass., said Secretary of State Hillary Rodham Clinton would visit Pakistan soon, and other officials said a senior CIA official would visit later this week to discuss the future of U.S.-Pakistani intelligence cooperation.
Mr. Kerry met with various Pakistani civilian and military leaders Sunday and Monday. In a news conference at the close of his visit, he said those meetings had led to a "road map" of "specific steps, not words," that are to be taken to improve U.S.-Pakistani cooperation on terrorism issues.
"These meetings have, in fact, reopened the dialogue between our countries," Mr. Kerry told reporters in Islamabad. "I believe this was a moment of opportunity for us to recalibrate, to readjust and to use this opportunity to press a reset button."
He repeated the Obama administration line that there is "no evidence ... that the high leadership of this country, civilian or military, had knowledge" of bin Laden's presence.
Mr. Kerry's comments seemed designed to stanch the anger expressed by both sides that was triggered by the bin Laden raid. Some U.S. officials raised questions about whether Pakistan had sheltered the terrorist leader for years, and Pakistani officials called the operation an affront to their country's sovereignty.
Ahead of Mr. Kerry's visit to Pakistan, there had been threats by Congress to cut U.S. aid, and by Pakistan's parliament to halt anti-terror cooperation. Ms. Clinton's visit, long scheduled, also had been in doubt.
Mr. Kerry said the bin Laden issue had caused such a serious rupture in ties that "the make-or-break is real." He added, however: "We are strategic partners with a common enemy in terrorism and extremism. Both of our countries have sacrificed too many of our citizens and troops to consider abandoning this relationship. Far too much is at stake."
The return of the helicopter wreckage, which Mr. Kerry said was set to happen today, was a key step. The helicopter, one of two that had brought Navy SEALs to bin Laden's compound, used new Stealth technology to help it to evade Pakistan air defenses.
The SEALs had tried to destroy the aircraft after it crash-landed at the compound, but the chopper's tail section -- with its distinctive, previously unseen rotor -- survived the demolition, and U.S. officials feared that Pakistan might share the technology with others.
Officials from both sides said Mr. Kerry had come with a "tough" message. One official involved said there was "no grandstanding" from either side in the talks. Mr. Kerry's most important engagement was with the Pakistan military leadership. He said he spent 4 1/2 hours meeting Sunday night with Gen Ashfaq Kayani, the army chief and head of the military, and Lt. Gen. Ahmad Shuja Pasha, head of the ISI, which is part of the military.

Load-Date: May 17, 2011


End of Document