U.S. TAPES SHEIK, BUT RULES OUT ARREST FOR NOW;
NOT ENOUGH EVIDENCE TO MERIT HOLDING CLERIC LINKED TO TERRORISM
Pittsburgh Post-Gazette (Pennsylvania)
June 27, 1993, Sunday,
TWO STAR EDITION


Copyright 1993 P.G. Publishing Co.
Section: NATIONAL,
Length: 882 words
Byline: RALPH BLUMENTHAL, THE NEW YORK TIMES
Body


With the help of a confidential informer operating inside a suspected bombing ring, federal agents recorded many private conversations of Sheik Omar Abdel-Rahman, the fiery Egyptian cleric who has been blamed for inspiring terrorism in Egypt and America.
But after reviewing those recordings the Clinton administration does not plan for now to arrest the sheik, law-enforcement officials said yesterday.
The decision comes as law-enforcement and administration officials debate how to proceed with the sheik. Senior officials in New York and Washington said the tapes did not reveal enough information to justify an arrest.
But others said there was also a desire to let Abdel-Rahman remain at large because the government gains important intelligence about Muslim radicals by watching the people attracted to him as he works from his mosque in Jersey City, N.J.
A decision to hold off action for now was endorsed by Attorney General Janet Reno, officials said.
The informant who helped break up a major bomb plot last week was a close aide to Abdel-Rahman and worked as a translator and bodyguard for him. He goes by the name of Emad Salem. It is unclear whether he got the tapes through a hidden body recorder or on the telephone, or whether certain locations were set up for audio surveillance.
Six of the eight men arrested on Thursday in a plot to bomb the United Nations, the federal building and two tunnels were followers of the sheik. The man described by law-enforcement officials as the ring leader of the bomb plot worked as a translator for the sheik.
New details, meanwhile, continued to emerge about the eight arrested suspects and at least three confederates known to investigators, and about the enigmatic informer working for the FBI who was credited with exposing the plot for a second terrorist bombing attack against New York City targets.
One of the suspects, Clement Rodney Hampton-El, was described by New York City police detectives as having worked closely with a radical Black Muslim group called al-Fuqra and that they believe he helped the group carry out many violent crimes, from bank robberies to murders.
As a loosely knit organization, al-Fuqra turned to Hampton-El and perhaps a few others in the Black Muslim community to provide it with weapons and expertise in carrying out attacks, the detectives said.
The question of whether to charge the Egyptian cleric in the wake of last week's foiled plot to bomb the United Nations and other New York City targets has been hotly debated at meetings of law-enforcement officials in New York and Washington, officials said.
The sheik is wanted in Egypt for inciting a riot that left hundreds dead in Cairo four years ago. But Egyptian government officials there have made it clear that they do not really want the political trouble that would be touched off among his followers by extraditing the sheik back to Cairo.
It is not known how the Egyptian government would view a decision by the United States to arrest the sheik and to try him for crimes here.
The rotund, diabetic preacher, who rose from the popular street mosques of Egypt's slums, has a history of eluding law-enforcement authorities who suspect him of inspiring terrorism on two continents.
He and many of his followers were charged in the murder of Anwar Sadat, the Egyptian president. Many of the followers were convicted, but the sheik was acquitted.
After a frenzied week that seemed at times to be a replay of the events that followed the devastating Feb. 26 explosion at the World Trade Center, which killed six people and injured more than 1,000, much of the attention once again focused on Abdel-Rahman. Except, as one official said, ''We nipped this in the bud.''
The 55-year-old preacher, blind since childhood, slipped into the United States from the Sudan in 1990 despite being named on a State Department watch list of suspected terrorists and attracting a following including Arab militants named in several terrorist cases: the assassination of Rabbi Meir Kahane, the the trade center bombing and last week's case.
Abdel-Rahman has repeatedly denied any involvement in terrorist activities.
Investigators have declined to detail the conversations taped by the informer, Emad Salem, but said they fell short of clearly implicating the Sheik, although other material remained to be evaluated.
''The U.S. attorney studied all that stuff for hours,'' one senior investigator said. ''It just didn't make it.''
''We all want to keep looking at it,'' the investigator said, adding that there was a reluctance to push for an arrest ''before the case is there.'' Attorney General Reno concurred, he said.
But an administration official in Washington said yesterday that the authorities could have marshaled enough evidence to justify arresting Abdel- Rahman.
However, he said, the cleric was seen by some officials as ''an intelligence asset'' who helped investigators gain information by monitoring those drawn to him. There was no suggestion, the administration official said, that the sheik was knowingly cooperating.
''We're in no rush to do anything about the sheik,'' he said. ''We know what he's up to. He doesn't represent anything we can't handle.''
However, he added, disclosures about the informer may have made Abdel- Rahman and many of his followers wary.

Load-Date: September 20, 1995


End of Document