U.S. needs to be tougher in fighting terrorism
St. Petersburg Times (Florida)
September 19, 1989, Tuesday, City Edition


Times Publishing Company
Section: TAMPA; GUEST COLUMN; Pg. 2; COLUMN
Length: 802 words
Byline: BRUCE A. EPSTEIN
Body


With the disclosure of the murder of Marine Lt. Col. William    Higgins, a slumbering America once again has been jolted into the    nightmare that is the reality of daily life in Lebanon. As President    Bush assesses the difficulties facing him in securing the release of    the remaining hostages, his sense of frustration is surely reminiscent    of that felt by Jimmy Carter during the Iranian hostage crisis.
 
     Yet the current situation hardly ever seems mentioned as a    "crisis," despite the fact that the hostages have been held for many    years with little progress toward their release. A relative lack of    attention and concern by the American people and media has been    uncharacteristically evident. I feel that a sense of outrage would be    more appropriate, for this also is a crisis - a crisis of confidence in    the Western democracies to deal with the forces of lawlessness that    threaten international order and peace. It is about time the United    States adopts a more forward and active policy to counter these    threats.
    An examination of the recent events in the Middle East points out    the need for the United States to take a more aggressive stance.
 
     President George Bush correctly expressed this nation's disgust at    the brutal murder of Lt. Col. Higgins. Although there are some    ambiguities surrounding the exact time and nature of his death, the    Organization of Oppressed of the Earth, one of the many groups that    claims to be holding hostages, proudly proclaimed its role in this    gruesome act. This group of terrorists is militantly anti-Western,    anti-American and, in my opinion, anti-decency.
 
     Then Israel announced the capture of Sheik Abdul Karim Obeid, one    of Hezbollah's top leaders in southern Lebanon. Obeid confessed to    having a key role in the kidnapping of Col. Higgins. In addition, he    admitted to helping plan and direct the kidnapping of two Israeli    soldiers last year and organizing other attacks against Israel.
 
     Many people in this country, including some members of Congress and    the administration, feel Israel has gone too far. They linked the    kidnapping of Sheik Obeid with Higgins' demise and became increasingly    concerned for the safety of the other American hostages.
 
     Sen. Robert Dole said on the Senate floor that "perhaps a little    more responsibility on the part of the Israelis one of these days would    be refreshing."
 
     The United Nations Security Council predictably condemned the    kidnapping of Sheik Obeid, proclaiming that it caused Col. Higgins'    death.
 
     I feel Israel acted "responsibly" enough. In my view, it is    inappropriate to equate Israel's capture of a man accountable for    terrorist activities within its borders with terrorists' kidnapping of    innocent civilians and, in Col. Higgins' case, a member of the U.N.    peacekeeping force.
 
     Israel is a nation at war with those holding the hostages. Its    citizens must deal with terrorist violence on a daily basis. It indeed    would be ironic if we would direct our outrage over the current hostage    situation at Israel, the world's most frequent victim of terrorist    brutality.
 
     Any Western-style democracy, and Israel provides no exceptions, has    a right to conduct military operations to defend itself against    terrorist activities.
 
     On a number of occasions, the United States has resorted to similar    efforts to capture international criminals abroad. Two prime examples    are the recent attempt to seize Abu Abbas, the PLO mastermind of the    Achille Lauro hijacking, and the pre-emptive air strike ordered by    President Reagan against Libya. (Not surprisingly, that country has    been notably quiet in fostering terrorist activities.)        I hardly advocate senseless aggression and violence, but such    punitive actions often are the only way a nation can stop acts of    terrorism inflicted upon its citizens.
 
     Not only should we support Israel's actions, but we should put the    blame for the death of any hostage clearly on the terrorists -    Hezbollah and its Iranian sponsors.
 
     Former Secretary of State Henry Kissinger has noted, "If every    time an American gets threatened, we wring our hands and start    attacking our friends, there's going to be a tremendous amount of    hostage-taking around the world."
 
     It is about time the United States developed an effective    counter-terrorism policy and served notice to all terrorists that    Americans will no longer be a country held hostage.
 
 Dr. Bruce A. Epstein has practiced pediatrics in St. Petersburg since    1973.
 
 Anyone interested in submitting a guest column for Tampa should    contact Charrie Hazard at Barnett Plaza, Suite 1140, 101 E Kennedy    Blvd, Tampa 33602.
 
    

Load-Date: November 9, 1992


End of Document