U.S. again condemns Iran for supporting terrorism
USA TODAY
April 20, 1998, Monday,
FINAL EDITION


Copyright 1998 Gannett Company, Inc.
Section: NEWS;
Length: 302 words
Byline: Barbara Slavin
Body


A new State Department report again slams Iran as the most active
state supporter of terrorism, a finding that could inflame the
debate in the USA and in Iran over resuming official ties.
Rep. Lee Hamilton of Indiana, ranking Democrat on the House International
Relations Committee, confirmed the finding of the report, to be
issued April 30.
"It is a snapshot of activity in 1997," he
said.
Mandated by Congress, the report acknowledges condemnations of
terrorism by Iran's new, more moderate president, Mohammad Khatami.
But it is similar to last year's, which called Iran the "premier
state sponsor" of terrorism.
The report faults Iran for hosting leaders of groups associated
with terrorism and links it to 13 assassinations, mostly of members
of Kurdish and other groups opposing Iran.
Some analysts oppose defining such activity as terrorism. "This
is a political document that preaches to the converted and has
the intellectual depth of a mud puddle," said Anthony Cordesman
of the Center for Strategic and International Studies in Washington.
The Clinton administration is caught in a dilemma as it tries
to hold out an olive branch to Iran while carrying out laws that
pre-date Tehran's conciliatory new tone.
The White House has postponed action on a 1996 law sanctioning
foreign oil companies dealing with Iran. But congressional staffers
say the White House grudgingly agreed last week to spend $ 2.6
million on a surrogate broadcasting station that supporters want
to call Radio Free Iran.
The debate over this year's terrorist report, which also evaluates
Iraq, Libya and other countries, was especially heated, participants
said.
Some argued that tough rhetoric would push the Iran to curtail
links to extremist groups such as Hezbollah in Lebanon. Others
worried that it would just antagonize Iranians hostile to the
United States.

Graphic

 
PHOTO, Color, Mohammad Sayynad, AP

Load-Date: April 20, 1998


End of Document