U.S. SAYS IT WON'T RETALIATE NOW
The New York Times
September 21, 1984, Friday, Late City Final Edition


Copyright 1984 The New York Times Company
Section: Section A; Page 1, Column 5; Foreign Desk
Length: 1200 words
Byline: By BERNARD GWERTZMAN , Special to the New York Times
Dateline: WASHINGTON, Sept. 20
Body


The United States today called the bombing of the United States Embassy in Beirut ''a senseless, brutal attack'' and a reminder that ''civilized norms of behavior are threatened by those who use terrorism as a political weapon.''
But senior officials said that, despite the frustration and anger over the third such attack against Americans in Beirut in 18 months, there was no plan for any immediate retaliation.
Walter F. Mondale, the Democratic Presidential contender, said in Seattle that he would support any ''appropriate countermeasures'' President Reagan might contemplate. (Page A13.) Congressional reaction ranged from criticism of security measures to calls for stronger efforts against terrorism. (Page A12.)
The President, at the urging of Secretary of State George P. Shultz, decided on a restrained response, officials said.
Expressing a seeming resignation over the attack, Mr. Reagan said before leaving on a campaign trip to the Middle West:
''You have to live and you have to do your best to protect yourself, but you have to know that these terrorist groups are threatening all over the world.''
He said the United States would not be driven out of Lebanon.
''We cannot crawl in a hole some place and stop performing,'' he said.
Mr. Shultz, his expression somber, told a State Department audience that the United States was taking ''every measure we can to deal effectively with this problem,'' but that the problem ''will be with us.''
In Beirut, security had been increased at the embassy, and all United States Embassies in the Middle East had been on alert since a general threat made on Sept. 8 by the Islamic Holy War, the group that said it carried out the attack today.
From the first days of Mr. Reagan's term, the Administration had spoken of the need to retaliate swiftly against terrorism. But White House and State De partment officials said that there was no plan to carry out any military actions against the Islamic Holy War group, which is believed linked to Iran.
John Hughes, the State Department spokesman, said no retaliatory action was ''contemplated or imminent.'' He refused to rule out action in the future, but said that, for the moment, the priority was to assure the well-being of those who were injured and ascertain the whereabouts of those missing.
Last October, after the attack on Marine headquarters in Beirut, the White House said that, once the perpetrators were found, the United States would ''respond to this criminal act.'' But nothing was ever done.
 
Difficult to Pinpoint a Target
At that time, officials said it was difficult to pinpoint a target in which those responsible could be hit and, moreover, France and Israel had already made air strikes of their own against camps believed to house terrorists in the Bekaa valley, east of Beirut.
Mr. Hughes said Mr. Shultz had sent a team led by Richard W. Murphy, Assistant Secretary for Near East and South Asian affairs, and Robert B. Oakley, in charge of antiterrorism affairs, to Beirut to recommend additional measures.
Mr. Shultz took charge of the Administration's operations in the predawn hours when word of the attack reached Washington shortly after 4:30 A. M.
A sense of shock seemed to sweep over the capital. A White House official said:
''It was a nightmare revisited. All of a sudden, I could see the embassy disaster and the marines being killed, and I realized it was not over yet.''
Robert S. Dillon, who was Ambassador to Lebanon when the American Embassy in West Beirut was destroyed by a car bomb in April 1983, said:
''When I saw the TV this morning, I asked 'How could it happen again?' ''
 
Beirut No Longer in Public Eye
Beirut had been virtually dropped from the political vocabulary here in the last six months. After two years of intensive interest, the Administration - and its political opponents - seemed to want to forget about Lebanon once the marines had been pulled out and the Lebanese Government adopted a pro-Syrian stance last March.
The shock over the incident today again raised questions that had been more or less submerged - whether the United States had a role to play in Lebanon, and whether it was worthwhile keeping such a large presence. The State Department said there were 100 official Americans in Beirut.
 
Blow to American Standing
Lebanon's decision in March to abrogate the Israeli accord worked out by Mr. Shultz was a blow to American standing in the region. As a result, officials had been uninterested in talking about Lebanon.
The new Lebanese Government, seeking to improve relations with Syria, had in fact gone to the United Nations to seek a Security Council resolution to force the Israelis out of southern Lebanon. But the United States vetoed the resolution, leading to the threat of Sept. 8 by the Islamic Holy War group against American installations in the region.
President Reagan, at a campaign stop in Norway, Iowa, spoke fatalistically today about trying to protect against terrorism.
''I think if someone is determined to do what they did, it is pretty difficult to prevent it,'' he said. ''Actually, the only defense you have against terrorist activities is if you can infiltrate and intercept and know in advance where they are going to strike.''
 
Issue Is Against Whom to Strike
Mr. Shultz had been a leading advocate for adopting such a pre-emptive policy. But officials said that the Central Intelligence Agency had not been able to infiltrate terrorist groups.
''There is no sense talking about retaliation,'' a State Department official said, ''unless you know who is to be retaliated against.''
Israel tends to strike against groups believed responsible for terrorist acts, without necessarily hitting the actual perpetrators. The United States has been reluctant to adopt such an approach.
Senator John Glenn, Democrat of Ohio, said:
''We must make every effort to determine the ultimate source of these terrorist attacks. If it turns out to be the Government of Iran, as has been rumored, then I think the President should consider terminating whatever shipments of parts and equipment to that country that may still be continuing.''
 
Reagan on Phone to Envoy
Mr. Shultz discussed the attack on the embassy at a State Department ceremony honoring Foreign Service officers, including some who had distinguished themselves in Lebanon.
He said he and Mr. Reagan had both spoken by phone with Ambassador Reginald Bartholomew in his hospital room in Beirut.
''He says he is just fine,'' Mr. Shultz said. ''Just a few cuts. But in his characteristic way of courage and coolness under fire, he has given us his report on the situation in Beirut.
''This terrorist attack once again reminds us of the importance of the efforts that we are taking to combat terrorism, of the international dimension of this problem, and of course the importance of working with other countries as we do to combat it in every way that we can.
''And I can assure you that we are taking, and will continue to take, every measure we can to deal effectively with this problem.''
Mr. Hughes, the State Department spokesman, said Mr. Shultz had spoken for the Administration in expressing ''our feelings about the senseless brutal attack on Americans and Lebanese working in Beirut.''


End of Document