U.S. Puts Uzbek Group on Its Terror List
The New York Times
September 15, 2000, Friday, Late Edition - Final


Copyright 2000 The New York Times Company
Distribution: Foreign Desk 
Section: Section A; ; Section A; Page 3; Column 1; Foreign Desk ; Column 1; 
Length: 835 words
Byline: By JUDITH MILLER 

By JUDITH MILLER 
Dateline: WASHINGTON, Sept. 14
Body


The Clinton administration has added the Islamic Movement of Uzbekistan to its list of foreign terrorist organizations, saying the group has ties to the Saudi financier Osama bin Laden, administration officials said today.
The decision reflects the administration's determination to isolate groups that it believes sponsor or abet international terrorism, especially those that American officials identify as part of a global network sponsored by Mr. bin Laden. Last year the United States placed Mr. bin Laden's group, al Qaeda, on the list, accusing him and his organization of blowing up two American Embassies in Africa in August 1998.
Addition of the Islamic Movement to the list of 28 foreign groups that Washington now accuses of sponsoring terrorism means that American citizens and residents are legally barred from contributing money or "material support" to the group. It also means that Islamic Movement members can be denied visas to, or deported from, the United States. And it enables the Treasury Department to seize assets held by the group or its members in American banks and financial institutions.
Administration officials said the department had already asked the nation's financial institutions to identify any assets that the Uzbek group or its members control, though they said they doubted that the group kept or raised money in the United States.
More broadly, the designation sends a signal to other states that the United States considers the group dangerous, hoping that they too will try to restrict its activities.
The agency reviews groups every two years, as required by Congress. This is the first time, said Michael A. Sheehan, the State Department's coordinator for counterterrorism, that it has not waited for that review to add a group.
Mr. Sheehan said the decision was intended to encourage the group "and all organizations to eschew terrorism as an instrument for their political goals." The move, he said, was not a signal that the United States "is against opposition forces to governments around the world, including Islamic groups."
"What we're against is their use of terrorism as an instrument," he said, adding that if the group or any other stops using terrorism, "we will drop them from the list."
The stated goal of the Islamic Movement, a coalition of several thousand from Uzbekistan and other Central Asian states, is to overthrow the secular government in Uzbekistan and establish a Taliban-style state there and in other former Soviet republics of Central Asia, which is about 85 percent Muslim.
In its annual report on terrorism issued this summer, the State Department criticized the Islamic Movement for its "anti-Western and anti-Israeli rhetoric."
One administration official, speaking on condition of anonymity, said there had been recent evidence that Mr. bin Laden had been shifting focus from the Middle East and North Africa to Central Asia. Several former Soviet republics are being destabilized by a resurgence of militant Islam and a flourishing drug trade. The Uzbek group has received financial support from Mr. bin Laden, American and Uzbek officials said, as well as from groups and individuals in Pakistan, Turkey, Saudi Arabia and other countries.
Most of its members are said to live in Kyrgyzstan, Tajikistan and Afghanistan. Its recruits have been trained in Mr. bin Laden's Afghan camps as well as in Pakistan, whose weak military government faces its own Islamic pressures. Training has also taken place in Uzbekistan's conservative Ferghana Valley, where poverty and unemployment have given militants appeal.
The Uzbek government holds the Islamic Movement responsible for five car bombings in Tashkent in February 1999. Uzbekistan claims that the group was trying to kill President Islam Karimov, who has banned religious political parties.
The Islamic Movement claimed responsibility for the fall 1999 kidnapping of four Japanese and eight Kyrgyzstanis. Last month it also kidnapped several American hikers, but they escaped. Uzbek officials said that in August, Islamic Movement guerrillas operating from bases in Tajikistan staged several incursions into a mountainous border region in Kyrgyzstan and Uzbekistan.
Sodiq Safaev, Uzbekistan's ambassador to Washington, called the decision to add the group to its list of terrorist groups "extremely positive." "It shows that these are not freedom fighters, as they claim," he said, "but skillful, well-financed, well-trained and well-armed killers." Uzbekistan is happy, he added, that Washington "now has a clear stand."
Last April, Secretary of State Madeleine K. Albright pledged $3 million in new military assistance for Uzbekistan and a total of nearly $10 million to help Central Asian governments fight terrorism and narcotics trafficking. But she also called upon governments in the region to establish greater respect for human rights and civil liberties. The State Department's most recent rights report calls Uzbekistan an "authoritarian" state whose police officers torture prisoners.

http://www.nytimes.com

Graphic

 
Map of Tashkent highlighting Uzbekistan: The Islamic Movement of Uzbekistan is on Washington's terror list.      

Load-Date: September 15, 2000


End of Document