U.S. poorly relates message on war on terrorism, Rumsfeld says He also visits Shanksville, Pa., where United Airlines Flight 93 crashed in on Sept. 11, 2001, killing all 40 aboard.
St. Louis Post-Dispatch (Missouri)
March 28, 2006 Tuesday
THIRD EDITION


Copyright 2006 St. Louis Post-Dispatch, Inc.
Section: NEWS; Pg. A7
Length: 262 words
Byline: THE ASSOCIATED PRESS
Dateline: CARLISLE, PA. 
Body


The United States is faring poorly in its effort to counter ideological support for terrorism, in part because the government does not communicate effectively, Defense Secretary Donald Rumsfeld said Monday.
Rumsfeld made the remark in response to a question from a member of his audience at the Army War College, where he delivered a speech on the challenges facing the country in fighting a global war on terrorism.
"If I were grading I would say we probably deserve a 'D' or a 'D-plus' as a country as to how well we're doing in the battle of ideas that's taking place in the world today," Rumsfeld told his questioner. "I'm not going to suggest that it's easy, but we have not found the formula as a country" for countering the extremists' message.
He said the al-Qaida terrorist network and affiliated Islamic extremists are the most brutal enemies the United States has ever seen.
Rumsfeld warned that unless the terrorists are stopped they will continue to seek the means to launch even deadlier attacks on the West in the years ahead.
Earlier in the day he stopped at Shanksville, Pa., to see for the first time the place where hijacked United Airlines Flight 93 crashed in a field on Sept. 11, 2001, killing all 40 passengers and crew shortly after hijacked planes crashed into the World Trade Center and the Pentagon. The government's Sept. 11 Commission report said the hijackers crashed the plane as passengers tried to take control of the cockpit.
In brief remarks, Rumsfeld said he wanted to pay his respects at "the place where America really started to fight back."

Graphic

 
PHOTO
 PHOTO - Defense Secretary Donald Rumsfeld spoke Monday at the Army War College. 

Load-Date: March 28, 2006


End of Document