U.S. MUST IMPROVE ITS WORLD IMAGE TO HALT TERRORISM, EXPERTS SAY;
AMERICA IS DEFEATING AL-QAIDA BUT LOSING "THE CULTURAL WAR," PANEL IS TOLD
St. Louis Post-Dispatch (Missouri)
July 10, 2003 Thursday Five Star Edition


Copyright 2003 St. Louis Post-Dispatch, Inc.
Section: NEWS; Pg. A4; ANALYSIS
Length: 525 words
Byline: The Associated Press
Dateline: WASHINGTON
Body


The United States is less vulnerable to terrorism today because of heightened vigilance but must improve its international relations to starve terrorist groups of new recruits, experts said Wednesday.
Scholars on terrorism and al-Qaida told the independent commission studying the Sept. 11 attacks that the United States badly needs an image makeover in the eyes of the world.
"Although we are winning the war against the organization called al-Qaida, we seem to be losing the cultural war," said Mamoun Fandy, senior fellow at the United States Institute of Peace.
Fandy said leaders of other countries, particularly in the Middle East, should be expected to express public gratitude for U.S. help. "Somehow, we tolerate Arab leaders telling us something in private rooms and then dealing with their public the way they want to," he said.
Dennis Ross, a peace envoy to the Middle East under President Bill Clinton, said the United States' choice of friends in the region contributed to the anger and resentment that helped al-Qaida.
"We are resented in no small part because we are seen as using democracy as a tool or weapon against those we don't like, but never against those we do like," said Ross. He is now director at the Washington Institute for Near East Policy. "We are seen as mouthing the words of democracy but then supporting regimes seen as repressive." He offered Saudi Arabia as one example.
The daylong hearing by the 10-member National Commission on Terrorist Attacks concerned al-Qaida, state support of terrorism and other challenges within the Muslim world.
In previous hearings, the commission has focused specifically on the events of Sept. 11, 2001. They have looked at how hijackers took control of four airplanes and why U.S. air defenses did not react more quickly.
"To defeat and destroy our enemy, we must understand more than the crimes it already committed," said commission chairman Thomas H. Kean, a former governor of New Jersey. "We must understand what drives and motivates it, the source of its power, the resources at its command, its internal strengths and weaknesses."
Rohan Gunaratna, head of terrorism research at the Institute of Defence and Strategic Studies in Singapore, told the bipartisan commission that the United States and the international community sat by for a decade as Afghanistan became "a terrorist Disneyland" where attackers were trained and assaults were planned.
The White House and Congress formed the commission last year after a congressional inquiry into intelligence failures. The panel has a May 2004 deadline to issue a report on topics including aviation security, immigration and diplomacy.
Kean and the panel's vice chairman, former Indiana Rep. Lee Hamilton, said Tuesday that government agencies have not cooperated fully with requests for information.
Sen. Charles Schumer, D-N.Y., reacted Wednesday by asking internal watchdog offices at the departments of Justice and Defense to investigate whether those departments should be assisting the commission more. Attorney General John Ashcroft said the Justice Department is "intent on providing all the access as expeditiously as possible."

Notes

NATION

Load-Date: July 10, 2003


End of Document