U.S. RETALIATION COULD TRIGGER CYCLE OF VIOLENT ACTIONS;
 OBSERVERS COMPARE U.S. STRIKES TO ISRAEL'S POLICY TOWARD TERRORISM.
Portland Press Herald (Maine)
August 22, 1998, Saturday,
CITY EDITION


Copyright 1998 Guy Gannett Communications, Inc.
Section: FRONT,
Length: 612 words
Byline: Adam Pertman and Aliza Marcus The Boston Globe
Body


The American missile attacks in Afghanistan and Sudan follow the Israeli model of a quick, tough response to terrorism - a shift in U.S. strategy that experts praised Friday for finally putting militants on notice that they'll pay a high price if they continue their aggression.
At the same time, they agreed that if Washington's new behavior becomes ongoing policy, it carries a potentially huge cost of its own: thrusting this country into a cycle of violence of a kind that Israel has experienced for decades.
''There is something in these operations which very much resembles what has been Israeli policy,'' said Shai Feldman, head of the Jaffe Center for Strategic Studies at Tel Aviv University. ''And I think it is the result of a realization that you can't let people around the world just keep blowing up American embassies and killing Americans . . . and the United States will not react and the perpetrators will go unpunished.''
Feldman added a caution, however. ''The United States will have to start living with the fact,'' he said, ''that such operations will cause some unpleasant reactions.''
Indeed, it appeared Friday that a strike-counterstrike escalation may already be in the offing.
Within hours of each other, Secretary of Defense William Cohen said in Washington that more U.S. assaults are being planned and may be executed, and the editor of a London-based Arab newspaper transmitted a threat from Osama bin Laden - whose alleged terrorist activities instigated Thursday's U.S. bombings - to retaliate with additional attacks against American targets.
Analysts with strong ties to the National Security Council said they understood that the Defense Department has already plotted the next American strikes.
They said that the intent was not only to damage terrorists' infrastructures before they could strike again, but also to reverse an international perception of the United States as a tough talker in areas from Bosnia to North Korea to Iraq, but one that's unwilling to back its words with action.
''It's only the beginning. There are going to be more strikes, because it's a message, not just about counterterrorism but about American authority,'' said Bill Taylor, director of the political-military program at the Center for Strategic and International Studies in Washington. ''This week's hits were not a whim. They were a signal: Look out, here we come.''
Israeli counter-terrorism specialists saw another similarity between the American attacks and their own country's approach to terrorism; that is, the underlying notion of both is to hit before getting hit. U.S. officials said the bombings in Afghanistan essentially were conducted for self-defense reasons, to destroy the terrorists' potential to carry out additional actions that they'd already planned.
''If you get information about active bases where plans are being designed, you bomb, you don't wait for them to do it first,'' said Yigal Carmon, who was the adviser on terrorism to Prime Ministers Yitzhak Shamir and Yitzhak Rabin.
But Israeli attacks on terrorists, some of which have never been publicly acknowledged, have proved costly.
In 1992, for example, an Israeli helicopter rocketed a car carrying a leader of the radical group Hezbollah, Abbas Musawi, killing him, his wife, and their infant child. A month later, a bomb believed to have been planted by Hezbollah ripped through the Israeli Embassy in Buenos Aires, killing 30 people.
And in February 1996, Hamas bomb-maker Yehiya Ayyash was killed by a booby-trapped cellular phone in the Gaza Strip. Militants blamed Israel for his death, which was followed by four suicide bombings that killed 58 people in the Jewish state.

Notes

sidebar missile strikes

Graphic

 
PHOTO: color;
Associated Press A factory in Khartoum, Sudan, which allegedly mad;
 a chemical used in the final stages of producing a lethal chemical nerve agent, shows the effects of Thursday's U.S. cruise missile bombing.

Load-Date: August 23, 1998


End of Document