U.S. re-establishing diplomatic relations with Libya; Rice: Iran, N. Korea should heed move
USA TODAY
May 16, 2006 Tuesday
FIRST EDITION


Copyright 2006 Gannett Company, Inc. All Rights Reserved
Section: NEWS; Pg. 1A
Length: 345 words
Byline: Barbara Slavin
Body


WASHINGTON -- The Bush administration said Monday that it was establishing full diplomatic relations with Libya and removing it from a list of nations that sponsor terrorism. The action ends 27 years of mostly hostile relations between the countries.
Libya reversed course on terrorism and weapons of mass destruction, earning the right to join the ranks of "the mainstream of the international community," Secretary of State Condoleezza Rice said in a statement.
Libya, led by Moammar Gadhafi, was once a leading U.S. adversary, characterized by the U.S. government as the ultimate rogue state. In 1986, President Reagan ordered the bombing of military targets in Libya.
The Bush administration hopes Libya will serve as a model for other nations to follow. "We urge the leadership of Iran and North Korea to make similar strategic decisions that would benefit their citizens," Rice said.
The moves angered some human rights advocates and relatives of those who died in the bombing of Pan Am 103, brought down by a Libyan bomb over Lockerbie, Scotland, in 1988.
"The moral compass of this administration is so off-kilter," said Kathleen Flynn of Montville Township, N.J. Her 21-year-old son, John Patrick Flynn, was on board the plane.
Flynn said Libya had not complied with United Nations Security Council demands to provide full information about the bombing, which killed 270 people, including 189 Americans. Libya has compensated victims' families.
Mohammad al-Jahmi, whose brother, Fathi, is Libya's most prominent political prisoner, also condemned the decision. President Bush, he said, "has betrayed the Libyan people."
State Department terrorism chief Henry Crumpton said Libya had not only stopped supporting terrorist groups but had worked with the United States to track terrorists, including some bound for Iraq. Libyan cooperation "is strong and getting stronger," he said.
The reconciliation caps a long effort by Libya to get back into U.S. good graces. In 1999, the Clinton administration began a series of meetings with Libyan officials that continued under Bush.

Graphic

 
PHOTO, Color, Reuters

Load-Date: May 16, 2006


End of Document