U.S. RESPONSE TO TERRORIST ACTS MAY CAUSE RIFT AMONG OFFICIALS;
OVERLAPPING, CONFLICTING JURISDICTIONS
Richmond Times Dispatch (Virginia)
February 3, 1999, Wednesday,
ONE STAR EDITION


Copyright 1999 The Richmond Times Dispatch
Section: AREA/STATE,
Length: 692 words
Byline: Peter Bacque; Times-Dispatch Staff Writer
Dateline: WILLLIAMSBURG
Body


America's response to a terrorist attack with weapons of mass destruction could be hampered by overlapping and sometimes conflicting local, state and federal authorities, say officials at a national terrorism conference.
While all levels of government represented at the States' Terrorism Policy Summit pledged cooperation with one another, speakers pointed out areas of potential conflict and confusion in "the awful aftermath of these insidious weapons" where casualties could mount into the tens and hundreds of thousands.
About 180 local, state, territorial and federal officials, some from as far away as American Samoa, are at this conference sponsored by the National Governors' Association to help develop a national terrorism strategy.
The presence of senior federal and state leaders, including Attorney General Janet Reno, FEMA Director James Lee Witt, and Virginia's Republican Gov. Jim Gilmore and North Carolina's Democratic Gov. Jim Hunt emphasized the gravity of the terrorism threat and bipartisan concerns about it.
The federal government plans to spend $ 2.8 billion next year on computer security, another manifestation of terrorism, and defenses against weapons of mass destruction.
The FBI has been designated the lead agency in terrorist incidents, but Gilmore noted that the FBI "will not be the first on the scene. Local people will be."
Reno said that the FBI's role "doesn't mean I'm going to tell you what to do."
In fact, said Sam Gonzales, who was Oklahoma City's police chief during the federal courthouse building bombing and now with the FBI, communities must be prepared to stand on their own for the first hours after an attack, perhaps even longer.
Meanwhile the Defense Department wants to set up a command to use the military in domestic terrorism crises.
It is unclear under the U.S. system of government whether federal officials could simply assume control from the states, or the other way around, said University of Virginia law professor John C. Harrison.
"Anytime you have overlapping responsibility, you have potential for conflict," he said.
While information on terrorist groups and their plans is vital to preventing attacks, security agencies are loath to share their knowledge with even high state or important local officials who do not have a security clearance, which can be expensive and time-consuming to issue.
"The working relationships among key agencies at all levels of government are limited, and in many instances, non-existent," said Myra Thomson Lee, director of Oregon's Office of Emergency Management.
America's enemies have found the nation's Achilles' heel, said Richard Clarke, the president's national coordinator for security, infrastructure protection and counter-terrorism.
"It's here," he said, "in the homeland."
And it is the homeland - the states and localities - that will bear the brunt of dealing with the results of a terrorist attack, officials said.
"There are no conventional frontlines in the terrorists' war," said Gilmore. "They don't just strike 'over there' any more. Now the threat could be just down the street."
Having a terrorist incident - bombs, nerve gas, biotoxins or even a cyber attack - "is almost inevitable," Hunt said. "Those crazy people are springing up more and more."
People may remember the 1996 Olympic Games in Atlanta for the deadly bombing in Centennial Park, but authorities were confronted with 693 bomb threats and reports of suspicious packages during the games, said Gary McConnell, director of the Georgia Emergency Management Agency. That amounted to one every 40 minutes for 17 days.
Besides responding to terrorist incidents, caring for the injured, investigating the crime, maintaining crucial public services and protecting emergency workers, governments need to try to prevent attacks. In doing that, however, governments may be stampeded into stepping on rights of people.
"We are a free society," Gilmore said. "We want to preserve that environment. It would be easy to lose sight of that. That is the biggest challenge we face."
Should government endanger individual freedom in America, Gilmore said, "the terrorists will, in a perverse way, win."

Graphic

 
PHOTO

Load-Date: February 4, 1999


End of Document