U.S. ASSAILS GREEK CANCELLATION OF EXERCISES
The New York Times
August 22, 1984, Wednesday, Late City Final Edition


Copyright 1984 The New York Times Company
Section: Section A; Page 11, Column 1; Foreign Desk
Length: 689 words
Byline: By BERNARD GWERTZMAN
Dateline: WASHINGTON, Aug. 21
Body


The United States criticized Greece today for canceling a planned military exercise with United States troops without warning. Such exercises have been regularly held for 20 years.
The incident was the latest in a series between the two North Atlantic Treaty Organization allies that has produced considerable irritation here with the Socialist Government of Prime Minister Andreas Papandreou, even though in recent weeks there had been signs that Mr. Papandreou was trying to ease the tension.
State Department spokesman Alan D Romberg criticizes Greece for canceling planned military exercise with US troops without warning; such exercises have been regularly held for 20 years; incident is latest in series between Greece and US that has produced considerable irritation in US with Socialist Government of Prime Min Andreas Papandreou; Greece reiterates that it will not participate in scheduled NATO exercises in Aegean Sea (M)
The canceled exercise, called Zeus, was to have taken place Sept. 1-15 in the Greek part of Macedonia with about 200 American troops. It has been held every two years for 20 years, Defense Department officials said. On Monday, the Greek Government spokesman, Dimitrios Maroudhas, announced in Athens that Mr. Papandreou, who is also Defense Minister, had canceled the maneuvers and that they would not be held in the future.
 
U.S. Not Told in Advance
Explaining the decision, which had not been conveyed to the United States Government in advance, Mr. Maroudhas was quoted by the Athens radio as saying that because the NATO alliance had refused to recognize ''Turkey's provocativeness and aggressiveness,'' the Greek Government saw no point in holding maneuvers to deal with a possible Soviet-bloc threat from the north when the ''existing danger to our country comes from the east.''
''Maneuvers in Greek territory that do not provide any experience for confronting the country's visible danger are meaningless,'' the spokesman said.
Alan D. Romberg, a State Department spokesman, said today that the United States regretted the decision ''to cancel the exercise, which we believe would have been of benefit to the forces of both nations.''
''We, of course, do not agree with the reasons put forward by the Greek spokesman justifying the cancellation,'' he said.
Greece also said again that it would not participate in NATO air, naval and land exercises in the Aegean Sea by forces from Italy, Turkey, the United States, Britain and Portugal from Sept. 17 to Oct. 20. The reason, a Greek spokesman said, was NATO's refusal to have maneuvers around Limnos because the Turks contend that the Greek island is in a demilitarized zone.
But the spokesman said Greece would participate in another NATO naval exercise in the Mediterranean.
 
Greece's Complaints
Mr. Papandreou, who came to office with a pledge to end the American military presence in Greece, agreed to the extension of American air-base rights but has sought to distance Greece from some of the NATO alliance's major policies. He has continually insisted that Turkey, a NATO member, is more of a threat to Greece than the Soviet Union is.
In recent weeks, senior American officials have complained that Greece was lax in dealing with international terrorism and had released a man accused of terrorism without bringing him to trial. The Papandreou Government was also accused here of having backed a long strike against an American air base. Greek security was called inadequate to prevent violence. The strike was settled this month, and there was hope then that tension between the two countries would ease.
The United States has accused the Papandreou Government of embarking on an overall anti-American policy, criticizing American arms-control policies, severely attacking American policy in Central America and refusing to criticize Soviet actions in Afghanistan and in Poland.
Greece has been seeking 16 old American-made F-5 jets from Norway, which no longer needs them. But the Administration, which has to give its permission before the planes can be transferred, has delayed acting, apparently to show unhappiness with the Greek Government's actions.


End of Document