U.S. AND SOVIET STUDY COMPROMISE IN MADRID TALKS
The New York Times
April 6, 1981, Monday, Late City Final Edition


Copyright 1981 The New York Times Company
Section: Section A; Page 5, Column 1; Foreign Desk
Length: 608 words
Byline: By JAMES M. MARKHAM, Special to the New York Times
Dateline: MADRID, April 5
Body


A 30-page compromise document drafted by eight neutral European nations has been received with a cautious welcome from the United States and the Soviet Union at the Madrid conference on detente and human rights.
With the 35-nation East-West conference already a month beyond its deadline for ending, Max M. Kampelman, the chief American delegate, called the proposed document ''probably the last hope for reaching a comprehensive agreement.''
Facing another round of negotiations on the new text - prepared by Austria, Cyprus, Finland, Liechtenstein, San Marino, Sweden, Switzerland and Yugoslavia - delegates agreed last week to take an Easter break beginning Friday and to return for fresh discussions May 5. Mr. Kampelman urged that the conference conclude after that, but other delegates predicted that they might be here much longer.
U S and Soviet Union study compromise in Madrid talks
Itself the object of laborious give-and-take among the eight drafting nations, the document touches the many issues that have been aired here, including the state of detente, terrorism, scientific and cultural exchanges, human rights, unification of families across ideological frontiers, working conditions of journalists and cooperation in the Mediterranean.
 
Notification Would be Obligatory
But a central feature is that the text embraces the broad lines of a French-sponsored proposal, supported by all NATO nations, for a post-Madrid conference that would strengthen trust between military blocs by instituting obligatory notification of military maneuvers in Europe.
The Soviet Union wants the Madrid meeting to be followed by a disarmament conference that would give the impression that, in spite of the chilly condition of East-West relations, both sides were still talking to each other.
In a speech to the Soviet party congress in February, President Leonid I. Brezhnev made a concession on the French proposal, saying that Moscow was willing to extend the territory covered by notification measures to the Ural Mountains. The 1975 Helsinki accords provide for nonmandatory notification of maneuvers in a belt that reaches 150 miles into the Soviet Union.
Since then the Soviet delegation has been insisting that the United States make a comparable concession covering North American territory, a demand that has been rejected by all NATO nations.  Diplomatic skirmishing over the shape of the post-Madrid meeting has blocked progress on most issues except for an emerging consensus on the question of terrorism.
 
No One Wants to Block Agreement
The principal question has been how eager the Soviet Union is for a post-Madrid conference and whether it would ''capitulate,'' in the words of a Western delegate, and accept the French proposal in its entirety. Failure to agree on the military conference would probably doom chances for much progress on other issues.
Neither the Soviet Union nor the NATO caucus wants to be put in the position of rejecting the document proposed by the neutral countries. Leonid F. Ilychev, a Deputy Foreign Minister and head of the Soviet delegation, said today that he was ready to ''stay forever'' to discuss it.
''We are very pleased,'' said Franz Ceska, head of the Austrian delegation and one of the authors of the document. ''It has been accepted as a basis for discussion. I don't want to be overly optimistic. I am not a dreamer. But I think there is a chance.''
Since procedural meetings opened in September, the Madrid conference has been marked by profound disagreements and sometimes fiery oratory centering on alleged human rights abuses in Communist nations, on Afghanistan and on maneuvers in and around Poland.


End of Document