U.S. screening won't be for air travelers only; Anyone entering or exiting the country, even on foot, will have a terrorism risk profile created, a published notice says.
The Philadelphia Inquirer
November 4, 2006 Saturday


Copyright 2006 Philadelphia Newspapers, LLC All Rights Reserved


Section: NATIONAL; Pg. A02
Length: 677 words
Byline: Ellen Nakashima and Spencer S. Hsu, Washington Post
Body


The federal government disclosed details of a border-security program to screen all people who enter and leave the United States, create a terrorism risk profile of each person, and retain that information for up to 40 years.
The details, released in a notice published Thursday in the Federal Register, open a new window on the government's broad and often controversial data-collection effort directed at American and foreign travelers implemented after the Sept. 11 attacks.
While long known to scrutinize air travelers, the Department of Homeland Security is seeking to apply new technology to perform similar checks on people who enter or leave the country "by automobile or on foot," the notice said.
The department intends to use a program called the Automated Targeting System, originally designed to screen shipping cargo, to store and analyze such data.
"We have been doing risk assessments of cargo and passengers coming into and out of the U.S.," Homeland Security spokesman Jarrod Agen said. "We have the authority and the ability to do it for passengers coming by land and sea."
In practice, he said, the government has not conducted risk assessments on travelers at land crossings for logistical reasons.
"We gather, collect information that is needed to protect the borders," Agen said. "We store the information we see as pertinent to keeping Americans safe."
Civil libertarians expressed concern that risk profiling on such a scale would be intrusive and inadequately protect citizens' privacy rights, similar to the issues that have surrounded air-passenger-profiling systems.
"They are assigning a suspicion level to millions of law-abiding citizens," said David Sobel, senior counsel of the Electronic Frontier Foundation. "This is about as Kafkaesque as you can get."
Department officials said that by publishing the notice, they were simply providing "expanded notice and transparency" about an existing program disclosed in October 2001, then called the Treasury Enforcement Communications System.
But others said Congress was unaware of the potential of the Automated Targeting System to assess non-aviation travelers.
"ATS started as a tool to prevent the entry of drugs with cargo into the U.S.," said one aide, who spoke on the condition of anonymity because of the sensitivity of the subject. "We are not aware of Congress specifically legislating to make this expansion possible."
The Senate Homeland Security and Governmental Affairs Committee, chaired by Sen. Susan Collins (R., Maine), on Thursday asked Homeland Security to brief staff members on the program, Collins' spokeswoman, Jen Burita, said.
The notice comes as the department is tightening its ability to identify people at the borders. At the end of the year, for example, Homeland Security is expanding its Visitor and Immigrant Status Indicator Technology program, under which 32 million noncitizens entering the country annually are fingerprinted and photographed at 115 airports, 15 seaports, and 154 land ports.
Stephen Flynn, senior fellow for national security studies at the Council on Foreign Relations, expressed doubts about the department's ability to conduct risk assessments of individuals on a wide scale. He said customs investigators are so focused on finding drugs and weapons of mass destruction that it would be difficult to screen all individual border crossers, other than cargo-truck drivers and shipping crews.
"There is an ability in theory for government to cast a wider net," he said. "The reality of it is, customs is barely able to manage the data they have."
The Automated Targeting System program relies on government databases that include law-enforcement data, shipping manifests, travel itineraries and airline passenger data, such as names, addresses, credit-card details and phone numbers.
The Homeland Security notice specified that the Automated Targeting System does not call for any new means of collecting information but rather calls for the use of existing systems. The notice did not spell out what will determine whether someone is high-risk.

Load-Date: November 4, 2006


End of Document