U.S. Says P.L.O. Not Engaged in Terror
The New York Times
May 25, 1990, Friday, Late Edition - Final


Copyright 1990 The New York Times Company
Section: Section A; Page 3, Column 4; Foreign Desk
Length: 955 words
Byline: By THOMAS L. FRIEDMAN, Special to The New York Times
Dateline: WASHINGTON, May 24
Body


The Bush Administration reaffirmed its view today that the Palestine Liberation Organization has kept its promise not to engage in terrorism.
The Administration's assessment, which was presented by the Assistant Secretary of State for Near Eastern Affairs, John H. Kelly, in testimony before Congress, was immediately branded a ''whitewash'' by influential members of the House of Representatives.
After listening to Mr. Kelly's remarks, Tom Lantos, Democrat of California, wagged a finger at him and said, ''Alice in Wonderland is a scientific research document compared with your testimony.''
 
In Defense of Report
Mr. Kelly had been asked by the subcommittee on Europe and the Middle East to appear on Capitol Hill today to defend the report submitted by the State Department to Congress in March stating that the P.L.O. has adhered to Yasir Arafat's commitment to renounce terrorism, which was a condition for opening, and maintaining, the United States-P.L.O. discussion.
In accord with a law entitled the P.L.O. Commitments Compliance Act, passed in February, the State Department must certify every 120 days that the Palestinian organization is abiding by Mr. Arafat's commitment, made in December 1988. Otherwise, the United States-P.L.O. discussion must be severed.
Mr. Kelly acknowledged that the State Department had identified various acts of violence against Israel by groups that are members of the P.L.O. But it concluded that either the acts did not fall under the State Department's definition of terrorism or that they were perpetrated by P.L.O. members opposed to Mr. Arafat and any sort of peace process, and hence could not justify ending the discussion, or American intelligence could not conclusively link the acts with the P.L.O. leadership.
 
P.L.O.'s Compliance
Mr. Kelly also argued that ''the U.S.-P.L.O. dialogue succeeded in bringing about P.L.O. acquiescence to a process of dialogue between Israel and Palestinians from the territories'' that could help advance the Israeli Government's own peace plan.
''The bottom line,'' Mr. Kelly said, ''is that while there have been questionable incidents noted in the report, we do not have conclusive evidence to indicate P.L.O. violations of its commitments. And the Israeli Government has not provided conclusive evidence to support its assertion that the P.L.O. has continued to engage in terrorism against civilians. As a result of these factors, the Administration has adopted the position of P.L.O. compliance - a position which is constantly reviewed.''
This prompted the subcommittee chairman, Lee H. Hamilton, Democrat of Indiana, to ask Mr. Kelly what exactly was the Administration's definition of ''terrorism.''
Mr. Kelly said: ''We consider terrorism to be premeditated, politically motivated violence perpetrated against non-combatant targets by sub-national groups or clandestine state agents, usually intended to influence an audience.''
 
Bounds of Terrorism
Mr. Hamilton then asked whether under the American definition of terrorism the P.L.O. could retain the right to attack Israeli military targets and still be in compliance with its commitment to renounce terrorism?
''I don't want to give a blanket green light to any sort of armed acts,'' Mr. Kelly said. ''I would say that we would examine the circumstances of any such action.''
Mr. Hamilton responded, ''Well, why don't you define terrorism more broadly then?''
Mr. Kelly said this was the Government's longstanding definition and, that it could under certain circumstances be applied to military as well as civilian targets, but it had to be applied with ''common sense.''
Representative Benjamin Gilman, Republican of New York, pointed out that the State Department's most recent report, Patterns of Global Terrorism, said the United States considered the Popular Front for the Liberation of Palestine, one of eight P.L.O. constituent groups, bound by Mr. Arafat's renunciation of terrorism, and that the State Department's report P.L.O. Commitments and Compliance concluded that there have been four terrorist attacks against Israel committed by the P.F.L.P. ''And yet you say that the P.L.O. is adhering to its commitments,'' Representative Gilman remarked.
Mr. Kelly answered, ''The way we reconcile them, Congressman, is that in the matter of the attacks involving the P.F.L.P., we believe that based on the best evidence that we have that those were not attacks that were planned, ordained, designed or commissioned by any of the P.L.O. leadership but by members of that organization.''
 
Definition at Issue
Representative Lantos interjected that the State Department's definition and its application of that definition to the P.L.O., a highly defused organization where orders do not clearly flow up and down an organizational chart, makes it almost impossible to find the organization not in compliance with the conditions of the dialogue.
Representative Stephen J. Solarz, Democrat of Brooklyn, said to Mr. Kelly: ''So, our policy as you've explained it is that we would only terminate the dialogue with the P.L.O. if elements or individuals within the P.L.O. commit acts of terrorism with the knowledge and, presumably, the approval of the top leadership of the P.L.O. But if elements of the P.L.O. engage in acts of terrorism without the knowledge or approval of the leaders of the P.L.O. and the leaders of the P.L.O. take no subsequent action to discipline them or to disavow them, even though we would like them to disavow them or discipline them, the dialogue would continue.''
Mr. Kelly responded, ''To put it another way, we do not leave it to the most extreme member of any of the affiliated groups to have the power within his own hands to terminate the dialogue by committing an act.''


End of Document