U.S. issues global travel warning; Alert says threat of attacks heightened during holidays.; TERRORISM
Dayton Daily News (Ohio)
November 24, 2015 Tuesday


Copyright 2015 Dayton Newspapers, Inc.
Section: ; Pg. A8
Length: 333 words
Byline: By Raf Casert and Elaine Ganley
Body


WASHINGTON - The State Department on Monday issued a worldwide travel alert for Americans, especially during the holidays, following increased terrorist threats around the world.
A travel alert, which is to be in effect until Feb. 24, said current information suggests that militants with the Islamic State, al-Qaida, Boko Haram and other terrorist groups continue to plan attacks in multiple regions. U.S. authorities said the likelihood of terror attacks will continue as members of the Islamic State return from Syria and Iraq, and other individuals not affiliated with terror groups engage in violence on their own.
Extremists have targeted sporting events, theaters, open markets and passenger planes. In the past year, there have been multiple attacks in France, Nigeria, Denmark, Lebanon, Turkey and Mali. The Islamic State has claimed responsibility for the Oct. 31 bombing of a Russian airliner in Egypt, killing 224 people.
"U.S. citizens should exercise vigilance when in public places or using transportation," the alert said. "Be aware of immediate surroundings and avoid large crowds or crowded places. Exercise particular caution during the holiday season and at holiday festivals or events."
The State Department said the U.S. is exchanging information with allies about threats of international terrorism.
The travel alert was issued the same day that Belgium's prime minister, Charles Michel, announced that Brussels would remain at the highest alert level for at least another week. The increased security measures following the Nov. 13 attacks in Paris that killed 130 people have virtually shut down the Belgian capital.
A Paris street cleaner on Monday found an explosive vest similar to those used in the Paris attacks near the place where a fugitive suspect's cellphone was found, raising the possibility that he aborted his mission, either ditching a malfunctioning vest or fleeing in fear.
Authorities said the device, which did not have a detonator, was found in a pile of rubble.

Load-Date: November 24, 2015


End of Document