U.S. military chief favors closing of prison in Cuba He says negative publicity worldwide about the prison for terrorism suspects has been 'damaging' to U.S.
St. Louis Post-Dispatch (Missouri)
January 14, 2008 Monday
THIRD EDITION


Copyright 2008 St. Louis Post-Dispatch, Inc. All Rights Reserved
Section: NEWS; Pg. A6
Length: 279 words
Byline: THE ASSOCIATED PRESS
Dateline: GUANTANAMO BAY, Cuba 
Body


The chief of the U.S. military said Sunday he favors closing the prison at Guantanamo as soon as possible because he believes negative publicity worldwide about treatment of terrorism suspects has been "pretty damaging" to the image of the United States.
"I'd like to see it shut down," Adm. Mike Mullen said in an interview with three reporters who toured the detention center with him on his first visit since becoming chairman of the Joint Chiefs of Staff in October.
He stressed that a closure decision was not his to make and that he understands there are numerous complex legal questions the administration believes would have to be settled first, such as where to move prisoners.
He also noted that some of Guantanamo Bay's prisoners are deemed high security threats.
Mullen, whose previous visit was in December 2005 as head of the Navy, noted that President George W. Bush and Defense Secretary Robert Gates also have spoken publicly in favor of closing the prison, which opened in 2002. But Mullen said he is unaware of any active discussion in the administration about how to do it.
Asked why he thinks Guantanamo Bay should be closed, and the prisoners perhaps moved to U.S. soil, Mullen said, "More than anything else, it's been the image - how Gitmo has become around the world, in terms of representing the United States." 
Critics have charged that detainees have been mistreated in some cases and that the legal conditions of their detentions are not consistent with the rule of law.
Mullen said he was encouraged to hear from U.S. officers here that the prison population has shrunk by about 100 over the past year, to 277. At one time the population exceeded 600.

Load-Date: January 14, 2008


End of Document