U.S. to Reduce Bureaucracy In Responding to Terrorism
The New York Times
October 8, 1998, Thursday, Late Edition - Final


Copyright 1998 The New York Times Company
Distribution: National Desk 
Section: Section A; ; Section A; Page 26; Column 5; National Desk ; Column 5; 
Length: 730 words
Byline: By JUDITH MILLER 

By JUDITH MILLER 
Dateline: WASHINGTON, Oct. 7
Body


The Clinton Administration is reorganizing its structure for responding to a terrorist attack involving chemical or biological weapons, acknowledging criticism from state and local emergency service officials that its current arrangements are "woefully fragmented," wasteful and confusing.
In a speech today at a conference on countering poison gas and germ warfare, Richard A. Clarke, the Administration's national coordinator for anti-terrorism programs, said that Attorney General Janet Reno is completing the new structure, which she would announce next week.
While sidestepping most specific questions about the new structure's details, Mr. Clarke outlined some of its features. He disclosed, for instance, that it would provide what he called "one-stop shopping" for state and local officials seeking Federal aid in training and buying equipment to protect citizens from biological or chemical weapons.
Specifically, he said, it would require that cities and states produce their own emergency plans for response to attacks before they receive Federal money. It would also authorize centralized Federal purchasing of most of the equipment that states and localities now buy individually to detect a chemical or biological attack and much of the clothing they now buy to protect emergency service personnel.
With a Congressional mandate, the Administration has for almost two years authorized Federal training for local officials to help them respond to attacks involving chemical, biological, and other weapons of mass destruction. Last year, the program authorized the Federal Government to spend some $100 million to provide such diagnostic equipment and to train local police, fire, public health, and other emergency officials in 120 cities. The cities receive about $50,000 each to buy the training and equipment they want.
From now on, Mr. Clarke said, "we will not write checks and say, Go and buy whatever turns you on."
"But before we spend a single dollar," Mr. Clarke added, "we'll figure out to whom local officials should turn" in the event of a biological or chemical emergency.
Toward this end, Robert M. Blitzer, a senior official of the Federal Bureau of Investigation, told a Congressional hearing last week that the Justice Department would create a new "National Domestic Preparedness Office" to coordinate the assistance and advice now offered by more than a dozen Federal agencies.
Both Mr. Blitzer and Mr. Clarke emphasized their concerns about the growing threat of biological and chemical terrorism to a conference sponsored by Jane's Information Group, which sells information on military topics, including chemical and biological terrorism.
Mr. Clarke also warned terrorist groups seeking to acquire weapons of mass destruction that Washington was prepared to strike them first.
"The United States reserves for itself the right of self-defense, and if that means our taking the first step, we will do so," he said. "We will not tolerate terrorist organizations acquiring or maintaining stockpiles of weapons of mass destruction."
In an interview after his speech, Mr. Clarke emphasized that countries that harbored such terrorists also risk becoming targets. Pointing to the recent missile attacks against Sudan, Mr. Clarke said the United States would "definitely do something" about such countries. "The something depends on what the circumstances are."
The United States, Mr. Clarke and Mr. Blitzer agreed, faces a growing threat from chemical or germ-wielding terrorists. Mr. Blitzer said that in 1997, the F.B.I. opened 68 new investigations into the threatened or actual use of chemical, biological, radiological, or nuclear materials. As of this September, the F.B.I. had opened more than 86 similar investigations.
"There is almost a one-to-one copy," Mr. Clarke told the conference, between the State Department's list of countries that sponsor terrorism and a secret Central Intelligence Agency list of countries that have chemical, biological, and nuclear weapons.
He praised Congress for approving most of the Administration's requests to transfer more than $300 million to Federal programs combating terrorism from other programs. But he criticized legislators for failing to approve the $50 million requested to improve the nation's public health system, which he described as the key to detecting and identifying a biological weapons attack.
      

Load-Date: October 8, 1998


End of Document