U.S. set to take; N. Korea off; terrorism list
Pittsburgh Post-Gazette (Pennsylvania)
October 11, 2008 Saturday
REGION EDITION


Copyright 2008 P.G. Publishing Co.
Section: NATIONAL; Pg. A-3
Length: 316 words
Body


WASHINGTON -- The Bush administration is trying to build consensus among its negotiating partners before removing North Korea from a terrorism blacklist in hopes of salvaging nuclear disarmament talks, U.S. officials said yesterday.
The administration is close to taking the step but is still consulting with China, South Korea, Russia and particularly Japan on the move, which is meant to revive the process, the officials said.
Officials said the decision was unlikely to come before the weekend.
Violence claims dozens
MEXICO CITY -- In another violent spasm, more than two dozen people were killed in Mexico within hours late Thursday and early yesterday, including a newspaper publisher, two federal agents and a group gunned down as they drank at a bar.
The slayings came as Mexico endures an unprecedented wave of drug-related warfare that has claimed thousands of lives as narcotics trafficking networks battle among themselves and with authorities.
Peru rebels kill 14
LIMA, Peru -- Shining Path rebels ambushed a column of military trucks in Peru's southeastern mountains with a bomb and gunfire, the military high command said yesterday, killing 12 soldiers and two civilians in the deadliest rebel attack in years.
Peru's conflict with the guerrillas had been largely dormant after the once 10,000-strong Shining Path was virtually eliminated in the 1990s.
Russian pullout faulted
TKVIAVI, Georgia -- Russia has only partially met its obligations under an EU-negotiated cease-fire, French Foreign Minister Bernard Kouchner declared yesterday as he toured damaged villages and spoke to Georgians displaced by the war.
He confirmed that Russia had met yesterday's deadline to withdraw hundreds of troops from strips of land in Georgia outside the separatist regions of South Ossetia and Abkhazia, but it has not withdrawn to positions held before war broke out Aug. 7, as required by the agreement.

Load-Date: October 15, 2008


End of Document