U.S. FREES TERRORISM SUSPECT
 The Philadelphia Inquirer
NOVEMBER 30, 1999 Tuesday SF EDITION


Copyright 1999 Philadelphia Newspapers, LLC  All Rights Reserved


Section: NATIONAL; Pg. A13
Length: 282 words
Byline: ASSOCIATED PRESS
Dateline: NEW YORK
Body


An Egyptian man painted as a terrorist and jailed for more than three years on secret evidence was freed yesterday after immigration officials gave up a last-ditch legal challenge to his release.
Nasser Ahmed, 38 - once a close associate of imprisoned extremist Muslim cleric Sheik Omar Abdel-Rahman - hugged and kissed his wife and children after walking out of a federal jail in Manhattan about 8 p.m.
A jubilant Ahmed said his accusers "are liars, and they know they are liars. . . . They knew from day one I had nothing to do with" terrorism.
The Justice Department notified Ahmed's attorneys yesterday afternoon that their client would go free. Later, in a four-line statement, the Immigration and Naturalization Service said it had withdrawn its request that Attorney General Janet Reno keep Ahmed jailed while it continued to try to prove that he posed a threat to national security.
An immigration appeals court had already ruled that Ahmed should be released. Reno had blocked the order. Federal officials, giving no indication that they would drop Ahmed's case, declined to comment further.
Civil liberties and Arab American groups have accused the INS of denying due process to about two dozen suspects of Arab descent by jailing them without allowing them to confront the evidence against them.
U.S. officials counter that laws and court rulings require immigration judges to consider evidence secretly in terrorism investigations involving non-citizens, partly to protect intelligence sources and national security.
In 1995, Ahmed was a court-appointed translator and paralegal for Abdel-Rahman when the sheik was tried and convicted for conspiring to blow up the U.N. and other landmarks.

Load-Date: October 22, 2002


End of Document