U.S. TELLS ISRAEL TO COOL OFF
Pittsburgh Post-Gazette (Pennsylvania)
September 12, 1997, Friday,
SOONER EDITION


Copyright 1997 P.G. Publishing Co.
Section: WORLD,
Length: 937 words
Byline: THOMAS W. LIPPMAN, THE WASHINGTON POST
Dateline: JERUSALEM
Body


Secretary of State Madeleine Albright called last night for a ''timeout'' in Israeli settlement construction and reprisals against Palestinians, saying they diminish prospects for implementation of the 1993 Oslo peace agreements because the Palestinians regard them as provocative.
She issued the appeal following a meeting with Palestinian leader Yasser Arafat in which he promised full cooperation in the fight against anti-Israeli terrorism. Albright has publicly pressured Arafat to crack down on radical Palestinian groups, and Arafat ''made what she regarded as the right kind of commitment,'' a senior U.S. official said, adding that Albright ''was encouraged.''
Albright's plea for Israeli moderation came in a nationally televised speech at a Jerusalem high school, in which she listed ''land confiscations, home demolitions and confiscation of IDs'' as Israeli actions that inflame Palestinian anger and inhibit cooperative efforts to combat terrorism.
She also called for a temporary halt to expansion of Jewish settlements in Arab-populated areas.
In remarks earlier yesterday and Wednesday, she also urged Israel to ease the border closure that keeps tens of thousands of Palestinians in the West Bank and Gaza Strip from their jobs inside Israel and to deliver to Arafat's Palestinian Authority tax revenues due it that have been withheld by Israel.
''It is beyond my understanding where withholding money is a security issue,'' she said at a joint news conference with Arafat in the West Bank city of Ramallah, just north of Jerusalem.
The first Israeli government response was negative. Reacting to Albright's call for a halt in settlement building, Prime Minister Benjamin Netanyahu's spokesman, Daniel Bar-Illan, said: ''We cannot freeze settlements any more than we can freeze life.''
Bar-Illan said he did not believe that Albright was asking Israel to freeze settlement building.
''The whole thrust of her pronouncements has been that a change in the attitude of the Palestinian leadership on terrorism must be the first thing to happen, after which one can return to the give-and-take of the peace process,'' he said.
Despite Arafat's pledge on terrorism, Albright conceded that she was far from her goal of restarting the peace process.
''I think that we have a long way to go,'' she said during a joint news conference with Arafat. ''I think that so far we have managed to get agreement on the fact that terrorists are terrible. But we have not, I think, yet been able to see what the best methods are to get the peace process back on track.''
For Albright, who has been accused by Arabs of pro-Israel bias, yesterday was a day of rhetorical support for Palestinian aspirations.
''The chances that Chairman Arafat or any other Palestinian leaders will resort to terrorism will be greatly reduced if the legitimate rights of the Palestinians are achieved,'' she said in her speech at the high school. In the Ramallah news conference, she urged Palestinians ''not to lose hope . . . and not to abandon the promise of peace.''
Marwan Kanafani, a close adviser and frequent spokesman for Arafat, said the Palestinian leader was gratified by Albright's call for a timeout in unilateral Israeli actions including settlement expansion.
''We have to commend her for calling on Israel to stop its settlement actions,'' Kanafani said.
But in Ramallah's cafes and shops, a glum mood prevailed.
''We have been waiting for Albright for a long time,'' said Khaled Mustafa, 58, the owner of an appliance store. ''She needs to give us more than words; we want something on the ground, some sign that the Israelis understand that closures, settlements and land confiscations are not the way to make peace. We're sitting in a cage here.''
By the end of the day, the direct language from both sides reflected what appears to be a breach between the Clinton administration and Netanyahu's government, which won election in a campaign based in large part on opposition to the Israeli-Palestinian peace agreement.
Albright did not retreat from her endorsement of Israel's demand that Arafat make a credible commitment to eradication of terrorism as the essential condition for resuming implementation of the Oslo agreements.
''To be effective, the Palestinian Authority's fight (against terrorism) must be comprehensive, relentless and sustained,'' she said in Ramallah. ''It cannot be pursued only when it is convenient to do so.''
But once a credible commitment has been given, she said, Israel should respond by refraining from what the Palestinians regard as unfair punitive actions that appear to prejudge the outcome of negotiations.
Opposition to what Washington called unilateral actions by Israel, such as the construction of Jewish housing near Arab neighborhoods in East Jerusalem, is long-standing Washington policy, but the Israelis have been trying to subordinate those questions to the terrorism issue.
Albright is looking for a way to cut through an impasse in which Israel says there can be no further moves toward peace until Arafat clamps down convincingly on terrorism. The Palestinians respond that Arafat has neither the will nor the ability to do that unless he is assured of the political and economic benefits promised in the Oslo peace agreements.
Albright told Arafat, a senior official said, that ''she needed a commitment and action on the subject of security'' before she could make a credible approach to the Israelis on the political and economic issues.'' The message, the official said, was: ''President Clinton and I want to help, but if you don't, we can't.''
The Los Angeles Times contributed to this story.

Load-Date: September 16, 1997


End of Document