U.S. continues to ignore fear, terror spread by Israel

The Pantagraph (Bloomington, IL)
April 1, 2003, Tuesday


Copyright 2003 The Pantagraph
Section: Editorial; Pg. A9
Length: 310 words
Body


Just exactly what people brought terrorism to the Middle East in the first place? According to former Israeli Prime Minister Menachem Begin's book, "The Revolt," he bragged that he was the father of modern terrorism.
His Irgun gang and Itzhak Shamir's Stern gang developed to a fine art the use of terrorism as a weapon of choice against the British and Arabs in Palestine in the 1940s.
Americans never saw on TV in the '40s the bombed United Nations shelters, ambulances and civilian refugee camps or the bombed-out King David Hotel in Jerusalem that killed over 100 people by Jewish terrorist gangs.
We never saw on TV the Irgun gang's raid on the village of Deir Yassin in April 1948, where Begin's men raped all the women and killed 254 innocents, including 25 pregnant women. Begin's massacres in Palestinian villages created over 600,000 homeless refugees, whose children would decades later form the PLO.
But long before there was a PLO or a Hamas, there were the terrorist Irgun and Stern gangs, that specialized in letter bombs, assassinations of U.N. diplomats, torture and mass murder.
The inescapable fact is that Israel was born and built by invasion, theft and terrorism. What goes around comes around. The terrorism Israel is experiencing today is a case of reaping today what Israel sowed in the '40s.
As long as America continues to finance and arm them, and even fight wars on their behalf, we, too, become targets of terrorism, like on Sept. 11, 2001. And Israel, now by its own admission, has several hundred nuclear weapons of mass destruction.
But I won't hold my breath on America inspecting, bombing or invading them. The world's founders of modern terrorism are untouchable. The American people are some of the stupidest, most brainwashed people in the world thanks to our one-sided media and biblically ignorant clergy.
Lyndle J. Gharst
Oreana

Load-Date: April 1, 2003


End of Document