U.S. shows hypocrisy in fighting terrorism
University Wire
February 1, 2002


Copyright 2002 Daily Skiff via U-Wire
Section: COLUMN
Length: 723 words
Byline: By Chris Dobson, Daily Skiff
Dateline: Fort Worth, Texas
Body


The U.S. government has started down an unrealistically idealistic path during the first few months of its mission to rid the world of evil doers. In order to catch Osama bin Laden and the al Qaeda network, the U.S. military has bombed an entire country and displaced many civilians.
Seeing as their ideology called for the virtual enslavement of females, the Taliban's removal from authority was a positive development for the Afghan society. But do American leaders have the right to inflict a war upon a society because of its leaders?
Texas Christian U.
If American leaders reserve the right to act unilaterally using violence as a means to achieve their objectives, have they differentiated their actions from those they call terrorists?
In the past 25 years, our tax dollars have sponsored, trained and armed guerrilla armies designed to destabilize society in Nicaragua and Afghanistan.
In the case of Nicaragua, the U.S. government refused to accept the authority of the Sandistas, who gained power through an election in which 80 percent of the population participated, because of their socialist agenda -- an agenda to improve schools, health facilities and enfranchising and taxing the entire population.
In Afghanistan, Zbigniew Brzezinski, Jimmy Carter's national security adviser, boasted that he drew the Soviets into an Afghani trap by creating the Mujahideen. This particular group was heavily funded by the Saud family -- also the Saudi Arabian government -- and drew recruits through fundamental Islamic teachings. Osama bin Laden left Saudi Arabia at age 19 to join the Mujahideen where he was trained with American weapons.
Given that these countries were trained by Americans, can their leaders reserve themselves the unilateral right to use violence? When others take this step, it is terrorism. The American euphemism throughout the 1980s was "freedom fighter." Perhaps it's time to remember those well-meaning excesses as criminal acts.
Even more grotesque is the Western Hemisphere Institute for Security Cooperation, which has flooded South and Central America with armed forces trained in counter insurgency. These forces have participated in the overthrow of the Allende government in Chile, the slaughter of 900 women and children at El Mozote and the assassination of Archbishop Oscar Romero in El Salvador. General Manuel Noriega even graduated from this institution, while it was named the School of the Americas, before going on to transport drugs with U.S. government acquiescence.
These instances and institutions are known throughout the world. But in America they are given little airplay by the mass media, and even then the coverage is distorted.
Under President Bush's new definition of terrorism, the CIA is guilty of aiding and supporting terrorist groups. Our U.S. government created and trained those, like Osama bin Laden, that are now running from the American war machine. Our government continues to resort to violence to achieve ends that, in many instances, are not worthy of the destruction they cause and could not possibly end the cycle of violence that terrorism creates.
Could the current Bush actually consider his father and the organization he headed, the CIA, to be terrorists as their past actions would require them to be defined? Or must we admit that our government does not have the ability to see the repercussions of its own actions.
The United States signed the United Nations charter in 1948 agreeing to solemnly uphold all the tenants. The government has instead blatantly ignored many provisions of the U.N. Declaration of Human Rights. In violation of its position on the Security Council, the U.S.-created sanctions have created genocidal conditions in Iraq, estimated at more than 5,000 deaths of children a month for the last 10 years, according to United Nations figures.
Hypocrisy appears to the world as a double standard, holding oneself to a lower standard then others. If the United States can smoke Osama bin Laden out of a cave, then he can smoke Americans out of a building. Terrorism did not begin Sept. 11, although many Americans began paying attention again at that moment.
Looking to the Middle East, it appears violence will never settle a dispute, no matter how hard American leaders try, or how big their bombs.
(C) 2002 Daily Skiff via U-WIRE

Load-Date: February 1, 2002


End of Document