U.S.: Suspect had explosives training; 3 men in terror case due in court today
USA TODAY
September 21, 2009 Monday
FINAL EDITION


Copyright 2009 Gannett Company, Inc. All Rights Reserved
Section: NEWS; Pg. 3A
Length: 412 words
Byline: Kevin Johnson and Brad Heath
Body


DENVER -- Federal agents who arrested three men in connection with a terrorism probe over the weekend said in court filings Sunday that they are investigating an international plot to blow up bombs in the USA.
In those papers, the FBI said it is investigating "several individuals" in the United States, Pakistan and other countries who it believes had planned to "detonate improvised explosive devices."
Neither the court papers nor federal officials offered details about the alleged plot or how much of a threat it posed.
The Justice Department said one of the men agents arrested late Saturday, Najibullah Zazi, 24, an airport shuttle bus driver, told the FBI he had received weapons and explosives training from al-Qaeda during a trip to Pakistan last year. Officials also found notes in his car describing how to build and detonate bombs; they were written in what agents said appeared to be Zazi's handwriting, according to court filings.
David Kris, an assistant attorney general for national security, said in a statement Sunday that authorities have "no specific information regarding the timing, location or target of any planned attack." FBI spokeswoman Kathy Wright would not comment Sunday about whether any of the men had attempted to make explosives or whether there are other suspects.
Zazi and his father, Mohammed Zazi, 53, were arrested outside Denver. Another man, Ahmad Afzali, 37, an informant for New York City detectives who the FBI said in court papers tipped off the Zazis about the terrorism probe, was arrested in New York.
None of the three is charged with engaging in terrorism; instead, they are accused of having lied to federal investigators, a felony. All are scheduled to appear in federal court today.
New York Police Commissioner Ray Kelly said Sunday that the investigation was "only just beginning."
The case unfolded on an unusually public stage. The government had previously acknowledged it was probing the younger Zazi's travel to New York City earlier this month; U.S. Attorney General Eric Holder said Friday that investigators were working on the case "around the clock."
Agents interviewed Najibullah Zazi for three days last week at the FBI office in Denver. He did not show up for a fourth scheduled interview Saturday. Wendy Aiello, a spokeswoman for Zazi's lawyer, said Zazi had "fully cooperated" with the government's investigation.
The FBI said he denied having written the bomb-making instructions.
Heath reported from McLean, Va. 

Graphic

 
PHOTO, B/W, Marc Piscotty, AFP/Getty Images

Load-Date: September 21, 2009


End of Document