U.S. REPORT: MILITARY AT 'RISK' PENTAGON STUDY WARNS TROOPS MAY BE ILL-EQUIPPED AGAINST TERRORISM
Pittsburgh Post-Gazette (Pennsylvania)
October 1, 2001 Monday
SOONER EDITION


Copyright 2001 P.G. Publishing Co.
Section: NATIONAL,
Length: 771 words
Byline: DAVID LERMAN, THE DAILY PRESS (NEWPORT NEWS, VA.)
Dateline: WASHINGTON
Body


The current armed-forces structure puts the U.S. military at a "horrific operational risk" as it responds to the threats of the 21st century, a draft Pentagon study concludes.
 The Quadrennial Defense Review, scheduled to be released this week, warns that today's force of 1.4 million active-duty troops might be ill-equipped to tackle the new threats of terrorism and weapons of mass destruction, a draft copy obtained by the Daily Press said.
 The long-awaited review, which will guide military strategy and spending for the next four years, was largely completed before the Sept. 11 terrorist attacks on the World Trade Center and the Pentagon. But parts of it have been rewritten to reflect the increased emphasis required in defending the U.S. homeland.
"The current force structure was assessed across a wide range of scenarios and contingencies on the basis of the new defense strategy," the draft says, "and the capabilities of this force were judged as presenting a horrific operational risk."
 The draft, dated Sept. 14, doesn't describe the nature or extent of the risk in detail, but it warns against any "substantial reductions in forces in the near term."
 It endorses the current size of the armed forces, which includes 12 aircraft carriers, 11 carrier air wings, 55 attack submarines, 10 active Army divisions and 38 active Air Force fighter squadrons.
 But it says some forces are not stationed in the right places around the globe and might need to be reorganized.
 Noting the rising importance of Asia as a military power center, the report says the Navy will increase the presence of aircraft carriers in the western Pacific Ocean.
 It wasn't clear whether such a move would require changing their home ports. Six of the 12 carriers are based in Norfolk, Va. Four are on the West Coast, one is based in Florida and another, the USS Kitty Hawk, is in Japan.
 In outlining a new military strategy, the report modifies only slightly a decade-long goal of being able to fight and win two large regional wars simultaneously.
 Under the new policy, defense officials have said, the United States would no longer be able to take over the enemy's capital in the second conflict. But the military would be prepared to conduct a number of "smaller-scale contingency operations," such as peacekeeping missions.
 At a briefing last week, Defense Secretary Donald Rumsfeld said he didn't yet know whether the new war on terrorism would be considered a "smaller-scale contingency" operation or a large regional war. "Only time will tell," he said.
 Despite the "horrific" risk associated with an expansion of military missions, the draft defense review fails to consider the option of expanding the size of the armed forces.
 "The idea that 'the risk is horrific already, and we're not going to increase the force,' is a bit of an oxymoron," said Michael O'Hanlon, a defense expert at the Brookings Institution. But O'Hanlon said the Bush administration, like most Republicans, had exaggerated the decline in military readiness during the 1990s.
 "I don't think the force has to be increased, and I don't think the risk is horrific," he said.
 But to conservatives, who have watched with alarm as the military was asked to "do more with less," the report's call for a status-quo force structure is deeply troubling.
 "The administration promised us a strategy-driven document," said Loren Thompson, an analyst at the Lexington Institute who has close ties to the Pentagon and the defense industry.
 "But it ended up being budget-driven. As a consequence, it recommends fewer forces than is required by the strategy."
 The draft report, which runs more than 100 pages, makes no attempt to estimate what it would cost to finance the strategy that it outlines.
 To fight new threats such as terrorism, the draft says, the military must make new investments in human intelligence, unmanned aerial vehicles, sensors and missile defense, among other things.
 But rather than bolster the size of the armed forces, the report says, the military can tackle new missions by reconfiguring current resources, streamlining Pentagon bureaucracy and making selected cuts in outdated weapons programs that it fails to identify.
 It also endorses the administration's call for a new round of military-base closings in 2003, a proposal that faces an uncertain fate in Congress.
 After nine months of study, the draft defense review fails to recommend a single weapons program that should be eliminated to free money for high-priority items. Instead, the review leaves to individual military departments the task of identifying "significant, auditable savings."

Notes

THE WAR ON TERROR

Load-Date: October 1, 2001


End of Document