U.S. Defends Itself on Inmate Abuse
The New York Times
May 9, 2006 Tuesday
Late Edition - Final


Copyright 2006 The New York Times Company
Section: Section A; Column 5; Foreign Desk; Pg. 17
Length: 502 words
Byline: By TOM WRIGHT

International Herald Tribune
Dateline: GENEVA, May 8 
Body


More than 100 American soldiers and intelligence officers have been disciplined for abusing detainees, United States officials said Monday before an international panel investigating the country's treatment of prisoners in its fight against terrorism. The number is nearly twice that cited by human rights groups. 
  In the second and final day of questioning by the United Nations Committee Against Torture, members of a United States delegation responded to queries on topics including the definition of torture and policies on transferring prisoners to countries with poor human rights records.
The delegates said the United States was acting to ensure that it adhered to its treaty obligations to prevent the torture of prisoners. It is one of 141 signers of the Convention Against Torture, a 1987 treaty. Problems of abuse found in prisons like Abu Ghraib in Iraq were isolated missteps, the delegates said.
  ''We recognize much of the world does hold the United States to a high standard,'' said the State Department's legal adviser, John B. Bellinger III, who led the delegation. ''Without question our record has improved.'' 
  Nora Sveaass, a panel member from Norway, said the United States had given ''very reassuring answers'' on efforts to bring those responsible for torture to justice. 
  Charles Stimson, deputy assistant secretary of defense for detainee affairs, said the United States had court-martialed 103 American service members and intelligence officers since 2001, leading to 19 convictions with jail terms of a year or more. 
  That figure contrasted with numbers quoted by the panel last week and provided by Human Rights Watch, a nonprofit organization based in the United States. The group identified 54 courts-martial, 10 of which resulted in jail terms of a year or more. 
  But human rights groups said the numbers cited by American officials were still low. Last week the panel cited data from rights groups saying that more than 600 service members or intelligence officers had been involved in suspected acts of torture. 
  In the two days of questioning, the panel pushed the delegation to define the scope of torture. On Monday, Fernando Marino Menendez, a panel member from Spain, asked whether torture could be defined to include the forced disappearance of terrorism suspects and the establishment of secret prisons. 
  ''I don't think one can say per se that it is,'' Mr. Bellinger replied. He said the United States believed that some terrorism suspects posed such a threat to security that they had forgone their rights to communicate with their families and others. 
  As for the interrogation technique known as waterboarding, in which a suspect is made to believe that he is drowning, Mr. Stimson said the revised Army Field Manual would not include the practice.
  When asked about the practice of sending prisoners for questioning to countries where they could be at risk for torture, American officials said the terms of the antitorture convention did not ban that policy.

http://www.nytimes.com

Load-Date: May 9, 2006


End of Document