U.S. DEFENDS ATTACK ON PLANT IN SUDAN / A REQUEST BY JIMMY CARTER FOR A PROBE WAS REJECTED. THE FORMER PRESIDENT SOUGHT PROOF OF TERRORIST LINKS.
 The Philadelphia Inquirer
SEPTEMBER 19, 1998 Saturday D EDITION


Copyright 1998 Philadelphia Newspapers, LLC  All Rights Reserved


Section: NATIONAL; Pg. A03
Length: 448 words
Byline: Robert Burns, ASSOCIATED PRESS
Dateline: WASHINGTON
Body


The Clinton administration yesterday defended its decision to attack a suspected chemical-weapons factory in Sudan last month and rejected a call by former President Jimmy Carter to investigate whether the plant really was connected to terrorism.
"We had overwhelming grounds to strike this facility," Sandy Berger, the national security adviser to President Clinton, told reporters yesterday when asked about Carter's statements. "For us to have not struck that plant, I think, would have been irresponsible."
On Thursday, Carter said a technical team should take samples of soil and building materials at the factory site.
"If the evidence shows that the Sudanese are guilty, they should be condemned for lying and for contributing to terrorist activities," he said. "Otherwise, we should admit our error and make amends to those who have suffered loss or injury."
Berger's spokesman, David Leavy, said the Clinton administration opposed an investigation such as Carter recommended. "We don't think it's necessary," Leavy said.
Berger said Clinton would renew his plea for international cooperation in fighting terrorism when he addresses the opening of the U.N. General Assembly on Monday. In justifying the Aug. 20 missile strike at the factory in Sudan's capital, Clinton has said it was linked to an international terrorist ring led by Osama bin Laden.
"He wants to make it clear to the international community that the fight against terrorism is not a clash of civilizations or cultures," Berger said. "The dividing line is between those who in practice support and tolerate terror and those who understand that terrorism is plain and simple murder."
Berger said that while the Sudanese plant did make legitimate medical products such as penicillin, there was no reason to doubt that it also produced EMPTA, a precursor compound that Berger said had no use other than in chemical weapons, particularly the nerve agent VX.
In previewing Clinton's terrorism speech at U.N. headquarters, Berger said the President also would meet separately with Italian Prime Minister Romano Prodi tomorrow and with Pakistani Prime Minister Nawaz Sharif on Monday.
Berger said a decision would be made within a few weeks on whether Clinton would visit Pakistan and India - as had been planned before the two nations tested nuclear devices in May in defiance of U.S. urgings to abandon their nuclear ambitions. He said the United States was insisting that both countries sign the Comprehensive Test Ban Treaty and take other concrete steps to get "back on track" to reducing regional tensions.
"I think there has been some movement, but I think so far it's been insufficient" to justify a Clinton visit, Berger said.

Load-Date: October 24, 2002


End of Document