U.S. IS SAID TO WEIGH ABDUCTING TERRORISTS ABROAD FOR TRIALS HERE
The New York Times
January 19, 1986, Sunday, Late City Final Edition


Copyright 1986 The New York Times Company
Section: Section 1; Part 1, Page 1, Column 4; Foreign Desk
Length: 1907 words
Byline: The following article is based on reporting by Stephen Engelberg and Jeff Gerth and was written by Mr. Engelberg
Dateline: WASHINGTON, Jan. 18
Body


The Reagan Administration has been debating several proposals to abduct suspects in terrorist attacks on Americans abroad and bring them before American courts, according to Administration officials. So far, senior officials have declined to approve the plans, but the Administration is continuing to consider the idea, the officials said. For example, they said, the Central Intelligence Agency and the United Stats Marshals Service are preparing a contingency plan for seizing several people in the Middle East who have been implicated in two recent terrorist actions.
The discussions illustrate the quandaries inherent in the Administration's recent efforts to apply the tools of the American legal system to international terrorism.
 
'Bending' the Rules
The State Department's legal adviser, Abraham D. Sofaer, would not comment on the Government's internal debates. But he said he was prepared to support to ''seizure'' of fugitives in other countries if the chance for success were reasonable. He acknowledged that such a move would violate international law, but said there were legitimate arguments in favor of ''bending'' the rules in extraordinary circumstances.
''It may well be we would have an opportunity to do something where innocent people weren't threatened, where our own forces, whoever was sent in to do the job, had a reasonable chance of success,'' Mr. Sofaer said. ''If such a situation arose, I'm sure there would be a lot of feeling we ought to consider it. We don't like the idea of people being able to murder Americans and simply laugh about it and go on living their lives as if nothing happened.''
A committee of the National Security Council has debated the issue several times and each time has rejected proposals for arresting terrorists abroad, officials said.
 
Fear of a Precedent
The objections to the operations included fears about setting a precedent, uncertainty over the effect on the countries involved and the reaction of the European allies. In addition, officials acknowledge, there is a high risk that something could go wrong.
The extradition of fugitives has long been a matter of dispute, even between friendly nations. An action defined by one nation as terrorism is sometimes seen elsewhere as political expression protected by the law. American courts, for example, have balked at Britain's efforts to extradite some members of the Irish Republican Army.
The debate over capturing fugitives is part of a larger dispute within the Administration over the appropriate response to international terrorism. Secretary of State George P. Shultz has been an advocate of responding militarily, but Defense Secretary Caspar W. Weinberger has been more reluctant to take military action.
After the rash of terrorist incidents in the last three years, the Administration has pushed to apply legal sanctions to terrorists. Administration officials have supported laws that would apply American criminal statutes to assaults on Americans abroad, and they have used Federal grand juries to investigate the major terrorist attacks.
''The effort to apply law to modern terrorism is really in its infancy,'' Mr. Sofaer said. ''We have just opened a law office, so to speak. We have just opened files and put a work force in place. People are out learning the tricks of the trade, and they're beginning to start getting indictments. We're looking for our fugitives, and we haven't yet figured out how to get them.
Last July, after the killing of Robert Dean Stethem, a United States Navy diver, by the hijackers of a Trans World Arilines plane, President Reagan said, ''We will act to indict, apprehend and prosecute those who commit the kind of atrocities the world has witnessed in recent weeks.''
In fact, terrorists have so far been largely successful in avoiding punishment by courts anywhere.
On an operational level, the investigations of terrorism against Americans abroad are handled by Federal grand juries under the direction of the United States Attorney's Office for the District of Columbia.
The cases under investigation include what are believed to be the abductions of six Americans missing in Beirut in the last two years; the hijacking of the Italian cruise ship Achille Lauro last October; the shootings at the Rome and Vienna airports on Dec. 27; the bombings in 1983 of the United States Embassies in Beirut and Kuwait and the United States Marine garrison in Beirut, and the hijacking of T.W.A. Flight 847 last June. The only publicly announced action has been the issuance of arrest warrants for three men believed to be the original T.W.A. hijackers, although there may be other charges or warrants that are being kept under court seal, officials said.
America's major success in apprehending figures accused of terrorism involved the Achille Lauro incident, when a plane carrying those accused of the hijacking was intercepted by United States jet fighters and forced down in Italy. Three men are awaiting trial in Italian courts.
But the man who the United States has said was the mastermind of the plot, Mohammed Abbas, was released by the Italians, a sharp disappintment to American officials, They had worked through the night to provide the Italians with a provisional arrest warrant and evidence on which to hold Mr. Abbas. Italy has since issued a warrant for his arrest.
'We had these guys identified, we had the request for provisional arrest and the complaint out of the judge like that,'' said Stephen S. trott, head of the Justice Department's Criminal Division. ''The guy was just sitting there, and they flinched.
''You can just see somebody sitting over there and saying, ''My God, we give this guy to the Americans and they'll come over here and blow up Rome.' ''
 
Many Are in Hiding
Most of the other terrorists implicated in attacks on Americans are in hiding and are rarely spotted. But the three men charged in the T.W.A. case have been seen openly moving about Beirut, witnesses say. The plans that have been discussed by the Administration would involve bringing terrorists to the United States for trial.
Mr. Sofaer of the State Department said the abduction of the person believed to have shot Mr. Stethem aboard the T.W.A. plane would be one instance in which he might favor an abduction.
Recalling the kidnapping by Israel in 1960 of Adolf Eichmann, who had a key role in the mass killing of Jews by Nazi Germany, Mr. Sofaer said, ''There might be situations where I would tell my clients, 'Yes, you may be violating a norm of international law in this instance, but the individual involved is akin to an Eichmann or a Hitler or the man who shot Stethem in cold blood.' ''
 
'Back in the Posse Era'
E. Lawrence Barcella Jr., the Assistant United States Attorney for the District of Columbia who is handling the terrorist inquiries, said, ''In terrorism prosecutions the issue is not gathering evidence, like in other criminal cases, but in getting the defendants and doing something about it.''
A senior Administration official said the support for abducting terrorists sought on charges in the United States had come form senior political appointees and form law enforcement officials.
''There are things like this going on all the time,'' said this official, who opposes proposals for abductions. ''In people's minds, we're back in the posseera, the Old West.''
 
'Because of the Headlines'
Another Administration official said: ''There have been people who have said, 'Let's look at Situation X,' and there have been discussions that some sorts of action like this might be considered. You get a lot of people enthusiastic about this because of the headlines it might make.
''There has not been a yes or no answer where somebody has stood up at one of these meetings and said, 'You just can't do that.' People have sat around and talked about how to deal with it. Generally, the conclusion is there are not adequate means to deal with it.''
President Reagan is considering issuing a directive that would establish the State Department as the agency that would take the lead in dealing with international terrorism, Administration officials said Friday.
The directive, if approved by Mr. Reagan, woudl be consistent with the recommendations in December of an interagency task force on terrorism that is headed by Vice President Bush.
It was unclear what authority the State Department would gain under the plan, although it appeared to mean it would issue statements and handle initial deliberations about a response.
The Administration's push to use the criminal law against terrorism gained momentum in 1984, when Congress passed the Comprehensive Crime Control Act, which made it a crime to take Americans hostage. For acts before 1984, the Justice Department must use statutes against air piracy or assaults on American officials abroad, Mr. Barcella said.
Mr. Sofaer noted that no Federal law covered the murder of American citizens abroad, a lack that frustrated effrots to bring indictments against those responsible for slaying four off-duty American marines and two American businessmen in El Salvador last year. The United States has offered a reward of $100,000 for information leading the prosecution and punishment of those involved in the attack.
Beyond problems with the statutes, Mr. Barcella and other Justice Department officials noted obstacles to prosecuting and convicting terrorists.
They said the United States lacked extradition treaties with many Middle Eastern nations. Other countries have provisions in their treaties that allow rejection of extradition if the accused was involved in a ''political'' offense.
The Federal Bureau of Investigation has agents in 13 foreign countries. They have no formal jurisdiction there to make arrests, according to Justice Department officials, but the department is confident that American courts would accept an apprehension of a fugitive brought back against his will.
''The manner in which a person is apprehended is irrelevant,'' said Mr. Trott of the Justice Department. ''If F.B.I. agents hypothetically ran over to Beirut with a net, snagged somebody and brought him back here, the court would say, 'We don't care how long he was in the net; they fed him, he's here.'''
But Mr. Trott said such a p lan could leave the F.B.I. agent open to lawsuits for illegal arrests, and he said the foreign country might well have grounds for charges of kidnapping.
Further, he said, it opened the possibility that other countries might send agents to the United States to kidnap people who were facing charges.
One argument against on operation to kidnap suspected terrorists is that it could anger America's European allies. ''One nifty snatch oepration that was opposed by say, Italy, would lead them to be angry, upset with us, and would not do very much to help us deal with terrorism,'' a State Department official said.
Officials say they have also had trouble securing indictments. The information about terrorists is often sketchy, they say, and much of it comes from sensitive intelligence sources that cannot be revealed.
Nevertheless, Mr. Sofaer said that eventually the United States would succeed in trying a terrorist. And he said it was possible that this country would then face further terrorism in which the demand was for the release of a prisoner or an end to a trial.
''We in America are going to be in the same position other states are in,'' he said. ''We have no choice if we want to bring this conduct under control.''


End of Document