U.S. rejects any hint of negotiations; Appeal to Congress: Ashcroft warns of a 'very serious threat' of terrorism if the U.S. retaliates
Telegraph Herald (Dubuque, IA)
October 1, 2001 Monday


Copyright 2001 Woodward Communications, Inc.
Section: Pg. a1
Length: 415 words
Byline: ASSOCIATED PRESS
Dateline: WASHINGTON
Body


The Taliban government confirmed Sunday that Osama bin Laden still is in Afghanistan, but the White House flatly rejected an overture to negotiate his fate.
Taliban ambassador to Pakistan Abdul Salam Zaeef said the Taliban, who have rejected a series of appeals to hand over bin Laden and avert a military confrontation, were willing to talk. "We are thinking of negotiation," he said, adding that if direct evidence against bin Laden were produced, "it might change things."
White House Chief of Staff Andrew Card responded: "The president has said we're not negotiating."
Card said the Taliban government has been told what to do. "They've got to turn not only Osama bin Laden over but all the operatives of the al-Qaida organization. They've got to stop being a haven where terrorists can train," he said on "Fox News Sunday."
Bin Laden must "be purged from Afghanistan and the Taliban knows that," Card said. "The United States is very patient, but we want to see justice done and we want to see it done quickly."
Defense Secretary Donald Rumsfeld was skeptical.
"It was just a few days ago that (the Taliban) said they didn't know where he was, so I have no reason to believe anything a Taliban representative has said," Rumsfeld said on NBC's "Meet the Press."
Meantime, Attorney General John Ashcroft warned of a "very serious threat" of new terrorism against Americans that might increase if the United States retaliates for the Sept. 11 attacks.
"We believe that there is the likelihood of additional terrorist activity. And it is our job to do whatever we can to interrupt it, to disrupt it," Ashcroft said on CBS's "Face The Nation."
"We believe there are others who may be in the country who would have plans," Ashcroft said.
The continuing threat against Americans was cited by Ashcroft as he argued for legislation he said would fight terrorism.
He called on Congress to meet President Bush's deadline of Friday for approval of the administration's plan.
"Very frank-ly, we need to do everything we can here at home," the attorney general said, repeating his claim that his department needs increased powers for surveillance, the ability to use information gathered by foreign governments and the ability to detain terrorist suspects for longer periods of time.
"We need the tools to prevent terrorism," Ashcroft said.
Congress has appeared cool toward the Bush administration's anti-terrorism package. Some lawmakers have questioned whether some of the provisions infringe on civil liberties.

Graphic

 
Mug - John Ashcroft

Load-Date: October 3, 2001


End of Document