U.S. SENDS ENVOY TO ELICIT SUPPORT ON LIBYA RESPONSE
The New York Times
April 13, 1986, Sunday, Late City Final Edition


Copyright 1986 The New York Times Company
Section: Section 1; Part 1, Page 1, Column 6; National Desk
Length: 994 words
Byline: By BERNARD WEINRAUB, Special to the New York Times
Dateline: WASHINGTON, April 12
Body


President Reagan has sent Vernon A. Walters, the chief American delegate to the United Nations, to European capitals to seek support for possible American action against Libya and to discuss Libyan involvement in terrorism, Administration officials said today.
At the same time, Mr. Reagan announced that he would send Attorney General Edwin Meese 3d to Europe later this month to discuss ways to combat terrorism in view of the recent attacks at a discotheque in West Berlin, aboard a Trans World Airlines jet over Greece and elsewhere.
White House officials said counterterrorism experts from the State Department, Justice Department and other agencies would confer with European officials on Monday and Tuesday before Mr. Meese's visit.
 
Envoy Meets With Thatcher
Mr. Walters, a veteran diplomat and former Deputy Director of Central Intelligence, met today in London with Prime Minister Margaret Thatcher and is to confer on Monday in Rome with Prime Minister Bettino Craxi. [Mrs. Thatcher agreed to the use of British bases by American planes striking at Libya, Reuters reported from London, quoting a newspaper report there.] Mr. Walters is also expected to visit Paris and Bonn to present the American view of the scale of Libyan involvement in terrorism and the threat posed by the Libyan leader, Col. Muammar el-Qaddafi. He is also expected to discuss Mr. Reagan's views on retaliation against Libya.
''Basically, we want to tell the allies where we are and what could happen,'' said one Administration official.
 
Carriers Prepared for Strike
The Administration's increased diplomatic activity came as two United States aircraft carriers remained near Sicily in preparation for a possible strike against Libya if Mr. Reagan gives such an order.
Mr. Reagan said this week that the United States was prepared to strike militarily against Libya if evidence pointed directly to Libyan involvement in the terrorism against Americans.
Several key American aides say evidence definitively points to Libyan involvement in the bombing at the West Berlin discotheque, which killed an American soldier and a Turkish woman and wounded more than 200 people. Other officials indicate that the evidence is strong but not conclusive.
Administration officials speculated that the Walters trip placed in abeyance, at least for the moment, a retaliatory strike against Libya, but officials declined to rule out a raid even in the next 48 hours.
 
'In a Holding Pattern'
Defense officials said two aircraft carriers, the Coral Sea and the America, were ''in a holding pattern'' today off Sicily. Officials said the carriers were conducting routine operations, awaiting orders on whether they should steam into the central Mediterranean toward Libya.
Mr. Craxi, the Italian leader, gave the first indication of the Walters trip when he said today in Rome that a special American envoy would meet him on Monday to discuss European support for the campaign against Libya. The State Department later announced Mr. Walters's mission.
Administration officials said details of the Walters itinerary would not be provided for security reasons.
A State Department announcement said: ''As part of our continuing consultation on the threat of terrorism, Ambassador Walters is undertaking a mission to Europe. He has been in the United Kingdom, where he met today with Prime Minister Thatcher, and will be visiting several other allied countries in the next few days. This mission follows on the mission of Deputy Secretary Whitehead in January. We also expect similar consultations in the future.''
Deputy Secretary of State John C. Whitehead visited Europe in January in a largely unsuccessful mission to persuade the allies to impose economic sancations on Libya. Many Europeans work in Libya, and the North African nation is a source of oil for several European nations, particularly Italy and West Germany.
 
Meese Visit on Terrorism
A White House spokesman, Peter H. Roussel, meanwhile, announced that Mr. Meese would visit Europe at the end of the month to consult with his counterparts there on ''measures we can take to reduce the threat of terrorism in Europe.''
''We are particularly concerned that American tourists, diplomats and servicemen are being targeted and brutally murdered in Europe,'' Mr. Roussel said. ''We want to work with European law enforcement and security officials to reduce the risk.''
Mr. Roussel said the United States was sending counterterrorism experts from the State Department, the Justice Department and other agencies ''to meet privately on an urgent basis with their counterparts'' before Mr. Meese's trip. He said the meetings would take place on Monday and Tuesday, but he declined to say where.
Over the next few days, officials indicated, the United States is preparing to accelerate pressure on Europeans to endorse American moves against Libya and isolate Colonel Qaddafi.
United States officials have been reluctant to publicly chastise the Europeans, but in private conversations they have criticized the Europeans for excessive caution in failing to condemn and punish Libya. ----Accord With Thatcher Reported LONDON, April 12 (Reuters) - As Prime Minister Thatcher held an hour of talks with Mr. Walters today, a spokesman refused to confirm or deny a newspaper report that she had cleared the use of British bases for American air strikes on Libya.
The newspaper, The Mail on Sunday, said Mrs. Thatcher had cleared the way for American F-111 fighters to strike at Libya from bases in Britain and from a British base in Cyprus.
Asked to comment, the Prime Minister's spokesman said only, ''We would certainly have to be consulted.''
The newspaper said that Mr. Walters outlined Washington's plans to Mrs. Thatcher on Friday and that she had agreed to back an American strike.
It said the British-based fighter planes could use the British air base at Akrotiri, Cyprus, as a forward base to soften Libyan defenses before planes from the Sixth Fleet went into action.


End of Document