U.S. must secure border to keep nation safe
University Wire
September 8, 2005 Thursday


Copyright 2005 The Lariat via U-Wire
Section: EDITORIAL
Length: 331 words
Byline: Staff Editorial, The Lariat; SOURCE: Baylor U.
Dateline: WACO, Texas 
Body


Safety is expensive but necessary.
Increased terrorism continues to threaten the nation. Illegal immigration is also taking advantage of the economy.
Tightening the hold on who can enter the country is one clear way to help prevent these problems. Border travel can be beneficial by generating income through commerce and tourism. But a new measure requiring a $97 passport could reduce the traffic flow on the edges of the United States.
A bill in intelligence-reform legislation passed by Congress last year will require all travelers from Canada, Mexico and other allied nations to show a passport or other secure documents to enter the country.
Travelers crossing our land borders will have to comply with the rules by Dec. 31, 2007.
Despite significant concerns voiced by President Bush about the bill's effect on traffic flow at key border crossings, the passport requirement still is headed toward implementation.
All who travel by air or sea from Canada, Mexico, the Caribbean, Bermuda and South and Central America will have to show a passport or one of four other secure documents by Dec. 31, 2006.
Federal officials from the departments of State and Homeland Security recognize the hardship the passports' costs would pose. They said they would keep working to create a cheaper document that allows citizens to cross borders.
In the shadow of the fourth anniversary of the Sept. 11 attacks, safety is more critical than ever.
As much of a reversal as it is from the welcome message of Ellis Island, we simply can't afford to give everyone asylum in the U.S. anymore. It's just too dangerous.
As we continue to fight the war on terrorism, it's critical that we do everything we can to prevent another attack.
Pumping up border security is worth the extra cost if it helps prevent terrorism and illegal immigration.
It would be too easy right now for a terrorist to cross our borders.
The United States' top priority right now has to be keeping its citizens safe.
(C) 2005 The Lariat via U-WIRE

Load-Date: September 8, 2005


End of Document