U.S. ENVOY CALLS FIRST P.L.O. TALKS 'PRACTICAL' ONES
The New York Times
December 17, 1988, Saturday, Late City Final Edition


Copyright 1988 The New York Times Company
Section: Section 1; Page 1, Column 3; Foreign Desk
Length: 882 words
Byline: By PAUL DELANEY, Special to the New York Times
Dateline: CARTHAGE, Tunisia, Dec. 16
Body


Two days after the United States dropped its 13-year ban on contacts with the Palestine Liberation Organization, an American envoy today held his first formal talks with a P.L.O. delegation.
''It is our hope that this dialogue, as it develops, will lead to peace,'' the American envoy, Robert H. Pelletreau Jr., said after the 1-hour, 40-minute meeting. Mr. Pelletreau is the United States Ambassador to Tunis, where the P.L.O. has its headquarters.
 
Details Not Provided
Mr. Pelletreau said the discussions were ''practical and characterized by seriousness of purpose.'' The head of the P.L.O. delegation, Yasir Abed Rabbo, said the session was ''constructive and fair.''
[The talks began as four Palestinians were killed in clashes with security forces in the Israeli-occupied West Bank. It was the highest one-day death toll in the Palestinian uprising since April. At the same time, Syria rejected the P.L.O.'s discussions with the United States, with official newspapers declaring that peace in the Middle East ''should be taken by force.'' Page 6.]
The two sides refused to provide details of their discussions today in a Government guest residence in Carthage, an ancient city founded by the Phoenicians and destroyed by the Romans. But at a news briefing earlier today in Tunis, 10 miles south of here, Mr. Pelletreau said he would ''make it clear how we feel about terrorism.''
 
Arafat Reported in Rumania
The meeting followed an American announcement Wednesday that Yasir Arafat, the P.L.O. chairman, had fulfilled Washington's conditions for talks: recognition of Israel, renunciation of terrorism and acceptance of United Nations Security Council Resolutions 242 and 338 as the basis for peace in the Middle East.
In making the announcement, Secretary of State George P. Shultz designated Mr. Pelletreau as the sole authorized liaison. Joining Mr. Pelletreau at the talks here today was Edmund J. Hull, political counselor at the embassy in Tunis. The P.L.O. team was made up of Mr. Abed, executive committee member; Hakem Belawi, P.L.O. representative in Tunisia; Abdellatif Abu Hajla, director general of the political department, and Abdullah Hourani, executive committee member.
Mr. Arafat was in Bucharest, Rumania, today, where he met with President Nicolae Ceausescu. A P.L.O. official said Thursday that Mr. Arafat might join the talks later. It is not clear whether the talks will resume before the Bush Administration takes office next month.
 
Strong Attack on Israel
While Mr. Pelletreau's statement was brief and general, Mr. Abed issued a strong attack on Israel and a defense of the yearlong Palestinian uprising in the West Bank and the Gaza Strip. Mr. Abed said he hoped the discussions would ''enable us to get closer to an international conference of peace in the Middle East.'' He said the American decision to begin talks with the P.L.O. put pressure on Israel to change its policies.
''Only the rulers of Israel are insisting on a policy of arrogance, terrorism, continuing oppression and rejection of all United Nations resolutions,'' he said.
''We're here to achieve the goals and aims of the uprising,'' he said. ''It will end with the establishment of a Palestinian state with Jerusalem as its capital.''
At his briefing earlier at the embassy in Tunis, Mr. Pelletreau offered a more detailed account of American intentions and strategy. He had invited only American journalists for background information, to be attributed to a Western diplomat.
 
Favors Direct Negotiations
But some British reporters, briefed afterward by their American colleagues, filed articles quoting the Ambassador by name.
Repeating several points made this week by Mr. Shultz and other American officials, Mr. Pelletreau said that ''part of our general principle is that direct negotiations are the best way'' to achieve peace between Israel and its Arab foes. He said he did not expect much from the opening round of talks, declaring that the fact that the meeting was taking place at all is ''perhaps a happening itself, the most important aspect.''
''A dialogue can only happen in a new administration,'' he said. ''On things of substance, we'll have a wait-and-see attitude.''
Mr. Pelletreau said the United States expected Mr. Arafat to condemn and disassociate himself from any acts of terrorism by Palestinian factions.
 
Concern Is Expressed
''What we want to do is to make sure P.L.O. performance matches Arafat's promise,'' he said.
Asked about terrorism by factions other than Mr. Arafat's group, Al Fatah, Mr. Pelletreau said, ''We are capable of taking a realistic view of what happens, but expect the P.L.O. to disassociate itself very quickly.''
Mr. Pelletreau and other American officials expressed concern that too much might be expected from the talks. They said the process would be long, complicated and frustrating.
The meeting was held on an unusually cold day for North Africa, with the temperature in the upper 40's. The participants gathered at 4:20 P.M. to pose for pictures and began their discussions about 15 minutes later.
The delegations faced each other across two tables covered with green tablecloths and two pots of flowers. There were four people at the American table, the two officials and two interpreters, and seven on the P.L.O. side, including three interpreters.

Graphic

 
Photo of Robert H. Pelletreau Jr., United States Ambassador to Tunisia, greeting Abdullah Hourani and Yasir Abed Rabbo, head of a Palestine Liberation Organization delegation, at a meeting in Carthage (AP)


End of Document