U.S. COURTING 3 NATIONS ON TERROR LIST WASHINGTON SEEKS BETTER TIES WITH IRAN, SYRIA AND N. KOREA WHILE CALLING THEM SPONSORS OF TERRORISM.
 The Philadelphia Inquirer
MAY 2, 2000 Tuesday SF EDITION


Copyright 2000 Philadelphia Newspapers, LLC  All Rights Reserved


Section: NATIONAL; Pg. A01
Length: 744 words
Byline: Barry Schweid, ASSOCIATED PRESS
Dateline: WASHINGTON
Body


Three countries courted by the United States for a better relationship - Iran, Syria and North Korea - were again branded as sponsors of terrorism by the State Department yesterday along with Cuba, Iraq, Libya and Sudan.
A yearly report showed a shift in concern from the Middle East to South Asia, where Afghanistan is a favorite haven for terrorists and where Pakistan has backed groups that engage in violence in Kashmir, a territory contested with India.
Michael Sheehan, who runs the department's counterterrorism office, said the Taliban, which controls most of Afghanistan, professes to want good relations with the United States.
But numerous terrorist groups operate on territory that the Taliban controls, he said at a news conference that coincided with release of the 107-page report.
Among them is the loosely linked al-Qaida organization, headed by Osama bin Laden, a Saudi exile. He is accused of masterminding the bombings in 1998 of the U.S. embassies in Kenya and Tanzania in which 230 people died.
Meanwhile, the Pakistan government has tolerated terrorists living and moving freely within its territory and supported groups in Kashmir that engage in violence, said the report, "Patterns of Global Terrorism 1999."
Pakistan is not branded a sponsor of terrorism, though. Under law, that would prohibit all but humanitarian assistance from the United States.
Cuba, however, is listed again. In 85 words, the government of Fidel Castro is charged with continuing to provide haven to several terrorists and U.S. fugitives. Colombia's two largest terrorist organizations, the Revolutionary Armed Forces of Colombia and the National Liberation Army, maintained a permanent presence on the island, the report said.
The Clinton administration has maintained long-standing sanctions against Cuba and has avoided any diplomatic overtures. It also keeps an icy distance from Iraq and Sudan. The U.S. stance toward Libya is under review.
Two Libyans will be tried this week for the deaths of the 270 passengers, crew and residents of Lockerbie, Scotland, when a Pan Am jumbo jet was blown out of the sky in December 1988.
Sheehan said Libya would remain on the terrorism list. But he also said that world sanctions had driven Libya "out of the terrorism business" and that its links to terrorism had dropped dramatically since the 1980s.
Secretary of State Madeleine K. Albright is weighing whether to revoke a ban on U.S. travel to the North African country.
Iran, Syria and North Korea, all courted for a better relationship with the United States, were condemned in the report.
It said Iran and Syria had continued to support regional terrorist groups that seek to destroy the U.S. peace campaign in the area.
And yet, President Clinton journeyed to Geneva, Switzerland, this year to urge Syrian President Hafez al-Assad to resume negotiations with Israel.
And Albright offered a dialogue to Iran that could lead to a restoration of relations broken after Iranian militants overran the U.S. Embassy in Tehran in 1979 and took its residents hostage. Albright has stressed, though, that the agenda would include U.S. allegations that Iran backed terrorists and tried to subvert the peace process.
North Korea is accused in the report of providing haven to Japanese Communist League-Red Army Faction members who participated in the hijacking of a Japanese Airlines flight to North Korea in 1970.
American officials meet regularly with North Korean officials, and the United States provided food and arranged for two civilian reactors and energy supplies in a trade-off for North Korea's suspending its nuclear weapons program.
The State Department said the number of people killed or wounded in terrorist attacks fell sharply last year - to 233 killed and 706 wounded from 741 and 5,952, respectively, in 1998.
Albright said the report was "largely heartening," with the number of Americans killed the lowest in seven years.
She also criticized congressional proposals to cut more than $2 billion from Clinton's request for international-affairs funds. "These reductions will harm plans to upgrade security and complicate efforts to counter terror," she said.
The Rogue Seven
Despite criticism of Pakistan and Afghanistan, the countries are not among the seven nations the State Department says engage in international terrorist activities - a designation that carries strong economic penalties. The same seven have been on the list since 1993:
Cuba
Iran
Iraq
Libya
North Korea
Sudan
Syria

Load-Date: February 4, 2002


End of Document