U.S. anti-terrorism effort lauded; Army culinary-training chief was at Pentagon when terrorists struck
Richmond Times Dispatch (Virginia)
September 11, 2010 Saturday
Final Edition


Copyright 2010 Richmond Newspapers, Inc. All Rights Reserved
Section: GENERAL; Pg. A-07
Length: 397 words
Byline: CHRIS I. YOUNG

Times-Dispatch Staff Writer
Body


 When the hijacked Boeing 757 hit the Pentagon, Army Sgt. Maj. David Turcotte was overseeing culinary preparations there for a large lunch for top military brass.
 Turcotte, the head executive chef for the restaurant serving the Joint Chiefs of Staff, heard alarms go off and evacuated the massive building with thousands of others. The place was so large he didn't feel anything when the plane hit, he said.
 From outside the building, Turcotte saw smoke coming from the other side of the Pentagon, and thought attackers hit the helicopter pad. Leaving the area by vehicle, he ended up on a clogged interstate.
 He could see where the plane hit the building and the fire that ended up burning for weeks. He couldn't get through the cellphone networks for about an hour and a half to tell his family he was OK.
 Turcotte found out the next day that some of his friends had died in the attack, which killed 125 Pentagon workers and 59 on the plane.
 "I think you feel anger and you feel like you want to get something done about it, but in the military the best thing to do is the job you're hired to do, do it well, and support the people who are making the decisions running the war," he said this week at his Fort Lee office.
 Over the weeks and months after the attack, Turcotte worked long hours, as everyone did, supporting the war effort.
 Today, the 22-year veteran oversees the Army's culinary-training program. From the Army and Marine Corps servicemen and women who feed hundreds or thousands in the field, to chefs who prepare gourmet meals for generals, they receive their culinary training at Fort Lee. Under national base realignment plans, Navy and Air Force culinary programs are moving to Fort Lee by the end of 2011 as well.
 Nine years after the Sept. 11 attacks, Turcotte looks back at the day that changed America forever.
 "I'm glad to see our country handles this a little differently than we did in some of the past wars," he said. "I'm glad to see there's a beautiful memorial for the people who perished in the Pentagon, a place anyone can go see. . . No matter what they do to us, we're always going to rebuild, we're always going to be put back together.
 "I think we took care of the people for the most part that did it, and hopefully we'll finish that job before we leave Afghanistan."
Contact staff writer Chris I. Young at (804) 649-6754 or cyoung@timesdispatch.com

Graphic

 
PHOTO

Load-Date: September 14, 2010


End of Document