U.S. DENIES PLAN TO ATTACK SYRIA; URGES RESTRAINT
The New York Times
November 8, 1983, Tuesday, Late City Final Edition


Copyright 1983 The New York Times Company
Section: Section A; Page 1, Column 6; Foreign Desk
Length: 1460 words
Byline: By BERNARD GWERTZMAN, Special to the New York Times
Dateline: WASHINGTON, Nov. 7
Body


Against a background of American, Israeli and Syrian military buildups in the Middle East, the Reagan Administration said today that the United States had no plans to attack Syria and urged the Damascus Government to show ''restraint and prudence.''
The comments by senior officials came as tensions again rose in the Middle East. Israeli and Syrian reservists were reported to have been called up, and American naval forces were strengthened in the eastern Mediterranean.
A senior State Department official said, however, that Israel and the United States were concerned and uncertain over the consequences of what he called ''an increasingly hard line'' in Syria. He reported on the results of a week of American-Israeli consultations in Israel, in which the sides analyzed the influx of Soviet weapons into Syria and Syria's seeming lack of cooperation in the search for a solution to the Lebanese crisis.
Syrian Army Alert
The Syrian Government put its armed forces on alert and declared a general military mobilization. Sources in Damascus said the Government feared a United States attack in retaliation for the bombing at the Marine headquarters in Beirut. (Page A15.)
Israel also assured Syria today that it had no intention of attacking Syrian forces, Israeli officials said. (Page A15.)
Another senior official said that Syria had mobilized its reserves, apparently in response to a routine Israeli call-up of some reserves and to the movement of an unusually large number of United States Navy warships to the eastern Mediterranean. Some 30 Navy warships, including three carrier task forces with 300 planes, will soon be assembled in the area. There is normally just one American carrier task force in the region.
State Department officials said that the Syrians have been concerned for more than a week about a possible retaliation by the United States for the killing of its marines. The State Department officials said that Syrian officials in Damascus last week went out of their way to assure the United States that Syria had nothing to do with the attack on the Marine headquarters at the Beirut Airport.
The Israelis, however, have blamed the Syrians for the suicide attacks on American, French and Israeli forces, and Israeli planes hit a Syrian position in Lebanon on Friday in retaliation for the explosion that resulted in the deaths of 60 people, 32 of whom were Arabs held prisoner by the Israelis.
Today, several State Department officials said that the United States had no plans to attack Syria or to join in any Israeli attack against the Syrians. They said that the growth in United States naval power in the Mediterranean was coincidental. The carrier Independence was on her way, with 1,800 marines from Grenada to Lebanon to replace the carrier Eisenhower, as originally planned. In addition, the carrier John F. Kennedy was heading for the eastern Mediterranean, eventually to sail through the Suez Canal to replace the carrier Ranger, in the Indian Ocean.
This increase in United States naval strength, combined with the Israeli actions, has upset the Syrians, officials said.
 
P.L.O. Fighting
Also, the increased United States naval deployment and the Israeli actions come just as Syrian-backed rebels from the Palestine Liberation Organization are defeating the forces loyal to Yasir Arafat, the P.L.O. chairman, near the northern Lebanese city of Tripoli.
The United States, which does not formally recognize the P.L.O., took no position on the fighting. John Hughes, the State Department spokesman, said, ''The United States does not see how this fighting is likely to lead to any practical steps to helping the Palestinian people achieve their legitimate rights.''
Mr. Hughes also reported new fighting around Beirut. He said one United States marine had reportedly been slightly wounded, and the Beirut airport had again been closed because of shelling.
''We obviously hope this will come to a swift termination,'' Mr. Hughes said.
A senior State Department official briefed reporters on the results of talks in Israel last week between Lawrence S. Eagleburger, the Under Secretary of State for Political Affairs, and top Israeli officials. The senior official said both sides were concerned over ''an increasingly hard line in Syria, a very limited indication that they are seriously seeking a reasonable solution in Lebanon.''
When asked to expound on the Syrian hard line, the senior official said the Syrians were showing little interest in helping produce a political settlement in Lebanon. The official also noted the pattern of a rapid military buildup, with the influx of advanced Soviet weaponry over the past year.  ''There is great uncertainty as to the consequences of the continuing military buildup in Syria, which is Soviet- backed, and how this will affect Syria's conduct in the next year or so,'' he said.
 
'Restraint and Prudence'
Mr. Hughes, discussing the Syrian mobilization, said, ''We would urge restraint and prudence'' be exercised by the Syrians. He said the United States and Israel were not planning any military action in Lebanon against the Syrians.
Mr. Hughes said the United States is still concerned about a rocket battery, believed to be under the control of pro- Iranian Lebanese, near the United States Marine position not far from the Beirut airport. There has been discussion about a possible attempt to knock out the battery before it is used against the marines.
The United States has said that, once it was certain who had carried out the terrorist attack on Oct. 23 that left more than 230 marines dead, it will retaliate. The Administration is working on the assumption that Iranians, aided by the Syrians, were responsible. Officials declined to say whether retaliation was planned soon.
 
'Blindly Striking Out'
Also today, President Reagan told an interviewer from the Korean Broadcasting System that he was so angered by the Beirut attack that he had given thought to ''blindly striking out'' against terrorists, but decided not to. He made the remark as he praised South Korea for its restraint after 17 South Koreans, including four Cabinet members, were killed in Burma last month by a terrorist bomb.
''It's very easy and I know it's only human to want to strike out in retaliation,'' Mr. Reagan said. ''I had those same feelings about the tragedy in Beirut. But getting the people directly responsible and doing something to indicate that terrorism does have its punishment is a little different from just blindly striking out and that's why, as I say, I admire the restraint that your Government has shown.''
He said ''the main thing'' was to show that terrorism ''doesn't work.''
''We know that the terrorism against our own people in Beirut was designed to make us retreat,'' he said, ''to make us say, 'Well, we'll take our men out of there. We'll abandon the mission that they were sent to perform.' We're going to prove to them that terrorist acts are not going to drive us away.''
 
Shamir to Visit Washington
Regarding the American talks with the Israelis, the official said that President Reagan had invited Prime Minister Yitzhak Shamir to visit Washington this month, and that a date was being discussed.
He also said that Mr. Eagleburger had told the Israelis that the United States would allow them to use some of the military credits given them by this country for use in developing the new Israeli fighter plane, the Lavie.
Another official said that Israel will be allowed to use $300 million from its line of credit, which is about $1.7 billion annually, for research and development in the United States. The Israelis would like to use the money in Israel, but so far the United States has not approved that request.
The Pentagon has in the past opposed Israel's using such credits for development of the new fighter because it might compete with American-built fighter planes. There was no explanation offered as to whether there was a change in the Defense Department's policy, or whether it had been overruled by President Reagan.
 
'Growing Concern'
The senior official said there was ''growing concern in Israel over the situation in Lebanon and indeed, a growing concern over Syrian purposes,'' that was shared by the United States.
Another official said that the Syrians seemed very ''up tight'' about the possibility of an attack on their positions in Lebanon. But the official repeated that the United States did not intend to attack Syria, or to take part in any joint mission with the Israelis.
There is an interest, the official said, in persuading the Syrians that their purposes would be best met if they would take a more forthcoming position in the negotiations among the Lebanese factions on ending the strife in Lebanon and on the withdrawal of Syrian and Israeli forces.

Graphic

 
photo of Moslem militiamen (page A15)


End of Document