U.S. attorney back on the job -- and in middle of terrorism fight
Star Tribune (Minneapolis, MN)
September 18, 2009 Friday
Metro Edition


Copyright 2009 Star Tribune All Rights Reserved
Section: NEWS; Pg. 1B
Length: 1041 words
Byline: JAMES WALSH, STAFF WRITER
Body


In some ways, little has changed in the eight years since B. Todd Jones last held the office of U.S. attorney in Minnesota -- much of the work still focuses on white-collar crime, drug offenses and illegal weapons.
But as Jones is sworn in today, he steps into a post-9/11 job as Minnesota's top federal law enforcement official with the Twin Cities at the epicenter of a sweeping counterterrorism investigation.
Jones takes the reins as investigators probe the recruitment, financing and terrorism training of up to 20 Twin Cities men of Somali descent who slipped away from their homes over the past two years and returned to Somalia to fight. At least five have died.
It's no surprise, then, that when Minnesota's new/old U.S. attorney was asked how the job has changed, he said: "The main thing now is the national security mission."
"Terrorism was on the radar screen before," he recalled, nodding to the 1993 bombing at the World Trade Center and the 1998 U.S. embassy bombings in Kenya and Tanzania. "But, coming back now, after 9/11, that's Mission One."
It's not the only mission, however. Jones must also continue rebuilding trust in an office embroiled in political turmoil under predecessor Rachel Paulose, who left amid a storm of criticism that she mismanaged the office.
Those who have held the job before say it is more demanding and complex than ever. But, they also say Jones is an excellent choice to figure it all out.
"He'll be even more effective the second time around than he was in the first," said Tom Heffelfinger, a former two-time U.S. attorney who hired Jones as an assistant years ago.
Terrorism in back yard?
As Jones, 52, reassumes the job he last held at the end of the Clinton administration, he acknowledges his office must juggle national security with other work. The public expects no less, said the former Marine Corps officer and federal prosecutor who spent the past several years in private practice.
"I have to multitask," Jones said. "We have to use intelligence and focus our resources on where the biggest problems are, so that we can walk and chew gum at the same time."
But if anything reinforces the shift to a heavier national security focus for all U.S. attorneys, it is the ongoing investigation here. Many of the young men who left their families are now known to have trained with al-Shabaab, an Islamic group the State Department labels a terrorist organization affiliated with Al-Qaida.
One local man, Shirwa Ahmed, died last October in a suicide bombing in northern Somalia. Four are known to have been killed in Somalia since June. Three men -- two from the Twin Cities, one from Seattle -- have pleaded guilty to supporting al-Shabaab. More indictments are expected.
Jones would not comment on ongoing investigations. But, he said, events in Somalia and here show a continuing need to be vigilant. "We have one of the largest East African communities outside the Horn of Africa right here in the Twin Cities. First-generation people with personal and financial ties," he said. "It's far away. But it's not so far away."
Leaving politics behind
One of Jones' first official moves is putting his stamp on the office -- naming his eight-person leadership team.
As part of that, Jones has promoted John Marti to first assistant. Marti, also a former Marine, stepped down from that post under Paulose after she retaliated against him for filing a complaint against her.
Jones acknowledged hearing of "push back" from some who question whether his choices are influenced by politics.
Paulose was appointed to replace Heffelfinger, who resigned in 2006. Later, information emerged that the Justice Department under former President George W. Bush was planning to fire Heffelfinger for political reasons. Democrats and others said the local office was politicized under Paulose. She did not return a call seeking comment.
Jones said any suggestion that he is making appointments based on politics "gets my back up." He noted that five of the eight people on the team kept the same posts they held under interim U.S. Attorney Frank Magill, a Bush appointee, and two of the jobs are new.
Jones praised the work of the 51 attorneys in the office, but added that he has to be able to choose his own team. "There is another `P' word -- prerogative," he said. "It's called choosing people you have experience with, who have competency in different areas. Sometimes, it's just to shake up the roster."
Heffelfinger and another predecessor say it appears Jones is choosing good career attorneys for important jobs. "It appears that team is made up of a number of familiar faces and that suggests this is another step in the office returning to stability," said David Lillehaug, whom Jones replaced as U.S. attorney in May 1998.
U.S. Chief Judge Michael Davis will swear Jones in today. "He has the quality of being able to lead large groups of people in a fair manner and that will bode well for that office," Davis said.
Those who know Jones say his return to public service was inevitable.
Jones himself said he didn't seriously consider a return to the job until after he participated on a working group that examined issues at Guantanamo Bay. Now, he said, he relishes the opportunity to again work with U.S. Attorney General Eric Holder, who will be at his swearing-in. They became close during the Clinton administration, when Holder was a deputy attorney general.
His goal as U.S. attorney, Jones said, is to tackle the job while also showing the public how the system operates and how he sets priorities.
B. TODD JONES
The new U.S. Attorney
BORN: May 23, 1957, in Cincinnati.
FAMILY: Wife, Margaret Samanant; three sons and two daughters.
HOME: St. Paul.
EDUCATION: Law degree from University of Minnesota, 1983; B.A. in political science, Macalester College, 1979.
CAREER: Partner in law firm Robins, Kaplan, Miller and Ciresi, 2001-present; U.S. attorney, 1998 to 2001; first assistant U.S. attorney, 1997-98; managing partner, Greene Espel, 1994-97; assistant U.S. attorney in Minneapolis, 1992-94; senior associate with Oppenheimer, Wolff & Donnelly, 1989-1992; Marine Corps infantry officer, prosecutor, defense attorney and judge advocate, 1983-89; commanding officer of Twin Cities Marine Reserves unit, 1993-95.
JAMES WALSH

Graphic

 
PHOTO

Load-Date: September 21, 2009


End of Document