U.S. INVESTIGATES RADICAL JEWISH GROUP
St. Louis Post-Dispatch (Missouri)
April 10, 1994, SUNDAY, THREE STAR Edition


Copyright 1994 St. Louis Post-Dispatch, Inc.
Section: NEWS; Pg. 3A
Length: 564 words
Dateline: WASHINGTON
Body


The federal government is investigating the fund-raising practices of the radical Jewish group Kahane Chai, whose members included Hebron mass killer Baruch Goldstein, sources say.
A special panel is made up of representatives of the State Department, Justice Department and Internal Revenue Service. The investigators are trying to determine whether the group violated U.S. tax laws and the Foreign Agents Registration Act in its fund-raising efforts, the sources said.
Officials said the principal issue was whether a group said by the Israelis to promote terrorism can legally set itself up in the United States as a tax-exempt organization by claiming that the money it raises is used for charitable purposes abroad.
In addition, both federal investigators and the state of New York are trying to determine whether several fund-raising groups related to Kahane Chai have failed to register and report their activities.
Kahane Chai was outlawed in Israel last month after the Feb. 25 massacre of 30 Muslims at a mosque in the West Bank city of Hebron. The killer was Goldstein, a militant Jewish settler and follower of the late radical Rabbi Meir Kahane, for whom the group was named.
Kahane himself was assassinated in a Manhattan hotel in 1990. Federal prosecutors have charged that the killing was part of an Islamic conspiracy that included last year's bombing of the World Trade Center in New York.
Kahane Chai leaders have called the United States their principal source of funds.
In addition to the federal investigation, New York State Attorney General Oliver Koppel is investigating possible violations by at least four associated fund-raising groups that have failed to register with the state as tax-exempt entities.
Koppel aide Richard Baar said the apparent infractions were called to his attention Friday by Jewish Week, a New York publication.
Michael Guzofsky, head of Kahane Chai in the United States, said that "to the best of my knowledge, we have not violated any tax laws or other laws." He said the organization was the victim of "an anti-democratic witch hunt" inspired by its enemies. "No one in Kahane Chai was ever convicted of committing an act of terrorism."
Michael Kraft of the State Department said the interagency group investigating Kahane Chai was being directed by the department's Office of Counterterrorism.
"Fund-raising by groups associated with terrorism is a complicated issue," Kraft said. "It's questionable whether you can prevent it unless there are violations of tax laws or the foreign agents act, which is being examined here. There are always First Amendment concerns in this country, because people can contribute money to any cause."
At the federal level, the foreign agents act generally requires groups or individuals representing a foreign country or "principal" to register with the Justice Department and file periodic reports of their activities. Kahane Chai once filed reports with the department but has abandoned the practice in recent years, officials said.
In a fund-raising ad published in New York, one group closely associated with Kahane Chai informed potential donors that their contributions would be "fully tax deductible." But the group, known as American Friends of Yeshiva Harav Meir, is not registered with either the Internal Revenue Service or New York state authorities as a tax-exempt organization, as required by law.

Graphic

 
PHOTO; Photo by AP - Israeli soldiers walk amid items moved to a newly established army base in the Gush Katif area of the Gaza Strip on Thursday. The base is at the site of the Jewish settlement of P'eat Sadeh, which was relocated.

Load-Date: April 11, 1994


End of Document