U.S. Edges Toward Israel on Palestinian Self-Rule Security Issue
The New York Times
December 7, 1994, Wednesday, Late Edition - Final


Copyright 1994 The New York Times Company
Distribution: Foreign Desk 
Section: Section A; ; Section A;  Page 7;  Column 1;  Foreign Desk ; Column 1; 
Length: 561 words
Byline: By ELAINE SCIOLINO, 

By ELAINE SCIOLINO,   Special to The New York Times 
Dateline: JERUSALEM, Dec. 6
Body


In a sign of Washington's mounting frustration with Yasir Arafat and his Palestinian Authority, Secretary of State Warren Christopher said today that Israel cannot be expected to withdraw its army from the occupied West Bank until Palestinian attacks on Israelis come to an end.
Attacks on Israeli soldiers and civilians by members of Palestinian radical groups opposed to Mr. Arafat have outraged Israelis and fueled dissatisfaction with the Government of Prime Minister Yitzhak Rabin. That, in turn, has threatened the core of the peace agreement signed by Israel and the Palestinians on the White House lawn 14 months ago: the withdrawal of Israel's troops from Arab towns and villages.
Until now, the Clinton Administration had routinely called on both parties to carry out their agreement as soon as possible. But amid signs that Israel is rethinking its own commitment to spreading Palestinian self-rule in the occupied territories, Mr. Christopher made clear today that the United States would not press Israel to act.
Asked at Tel Aviv's Ben-Gurion International Airport whether Israel should have to withdraw its army from the West Bank, as scheduled, Mr. Christopher said: "Unless there is security, it is clear that other commitments cannot be met. It is something that will have to be discussed between the parties."
He called the security pledges by both sides "absolutely fundamental to the process going forward."
Mr. Christopher is expected to raise the security issue when he meets with Mr. Arafat at his headquarters in Gaza on Thursday.
In recent days, Mr. Rabin has signaled a strong reluctance to withdraw the armed forces, as required under the peace agreement, from "populated areas" of the West Bank.
In Damascus, Syria, earlier in the day, Mr. Christopher pressed President Hafez al-Assad to say in public what Administration officials said he had told President Clinton in private in their meeting in Damascus last October: that Syria renounced terrorism.
"The Secretary made it clear that it was important for President Assad to say in public what he had talked to President Clinton about in private, that he is against the killing of civilians anywhere they take place," a senior Administration official said. Mr. Assad, he said, "has taken it under consideration."
Syria is still listed by the State Department as a sponsor of terrorism. But Syria recently has imposed "some restrictions" on the flow of weapons through its territory to Party of God guerrillas in southern Lebanon, a senior Administration official said.
Officials traveling with Mr. Christopher and senior diplomats in Damascus said that they expected no early breakthrough in the impasse between Israel and Syria, although both sets of officials played down the importance of recent accusations by Mr. Assad and by Israeli leaders that the other side is not serious about peace.
 |||
|--------------------||

Talks on Autonomy Resumed
 CAIRO, Dec. 6 (Special to The New York Times) -- Israeli and Palestinian negotiators resumed talks today on expanding autonomy although Palestinians fear that Israel will renege on withdrawing its troops from the West Bank.
"We have been told it takes the Israelis a long time to come to an agreement but once they come to an agreement they stick to it," said Nabil Shaath, the chief Palestinian negotiator. He urged the Israelis to "stick to the agreements."

Load-Date: December 7, 1994


End of Document