U.S. Accuses Benin of Abetting Libyan Terrorism
The New York Times
May 20, 1988, Friday, Late City Final Edition


Copyright 1988 The New York Times Company
Section: Section A; Page 3, Column 1; Foreign Desk
Length: 770 words
Byline: By ELAINE SCIOLINO, Special to the New York Times
Dateline: WASHINGTON, May 19
Body


The United States has accused the West African nation of Benin of allowing Libyan agents to use its territory to foment acts of terrorism, State Department officials said today.
United States Embassy officials in Benin have ''strenuously protested'' Benin's tolerance of such activities to senior officials in Benin, including the country's President, Brig. Gen. Mathieu Kerekou, State Department officials said. General Kerekou falsely assured the United States that he had put an end to Libyan terrorist activities in his country, the officials added.
''The United States has become increasingly alarmed that Benin is being used as a base for Libyan state-supported terrorism,'' one State Department official said. ''We have urged the President to take positive action immediately.''
Arrests in Senegal
State Department officials said they are particularly concerned about the Libyan use of Benin for terrorism because it is part of a pattern of infiltration into West Africa by agents of Libya's leader, Col. Muammar el-Qaddafi, and of the Iranian-backed Party of God.
The accusation against Benin stems from an incident on Feb. 20 in which two Libyan agents and one Senegalese citizen were arrested at the airport in Dakar, Senegal, after arriving on an Air Afrique flight from Cotonou, Benin's largest town, via Abidjan, Ivory Coast. Officials said they were carrying a sophisticated electronic time-delay firing device, 19 pounds of plastic explosive and TNT, 10 electrical detonators and other materials that could be used in making a bomb; they also were carrying a pistol with a silencer and 25 rounds of ammunition, the officials said.
 
With a Libyan Tied to Terrorism
The two Libyans, identified as Mohammed al-Marzuo and Mansur Umran Sabir, reportedly were driven to the airport in Cotonou in the official car of Mustafa Abu Setta, the head of the Libyan People's Bureau or embassy in Benin, according to American intelligence reports. Mr. Setta, who is believed to have extensive ties to terrorist networks in the region, was said to have been in the car at the time.
A third man, Hasan Salah, described as a Libyan agent involved in the plot, was arrested on a train coming from Mali two days earlier for trying to enter Senegal with false papers.
American officials believe the explosives were brought into Benin by a Libyan-backed import-export company known as Sabra.
''It was an example of a classic Libyan destabilization activity mounted through Benin with the direct involvement of Libyan officials,'' one State Department official said.
Senegal, a former French colony which maintains strong ties to Paris, broke diplomatic relations with Libya in 1980 over suspicions of Libyan efforts to undermine the Government. Relations have remained tense because of Senegal's sympathy for Chad in its war with Libya and charges of Libyan involvement in coup attempts in neighboring Gambia.
A senior Libyan diplomat at the Libyan Mission to the United Nations in New York denied Washington's accusations, saying: ''There is no element of truth in the story of Libyan involvement. Libya is a very democratic country, especially these days, and we have invited all interested people to the country to see for themselves.'' Telephone calls to the Benin Embassy were not returned.
After the arrests of the Libyans in Senegal, General Kerekou gave the United States his assurances that Mr. Setta was no longer in Benin and that the Sabra company had been closed for its suspected role in smuggling arms and supporting Libyan terrorist operations. Since then, however, American officials have learned that Mr. Setta has returned, that the company reopened in early May and that another Libyan-backed import-export company has opened.
In addition, State Department are questioning why General Kerekou has allowed the resumption of Libyan Arab Airways flights between Libya and Cotonou after he ordered visa restrictions on the entry of Libyans and Chadians.
 
U.S. Threats on Loans
The matter is so sensitive that General Kerekou was told by the United States that unless there was some positive action taken on the matter soon, his Foreign Minister would not be welcome when he comes to Washington in mid-June.
''We made it clear that a productive visit might not be possible,'' one State Department official said.
The Foreign Minister, Guy Landry Hazoume, subsequently cancelled his visit, although it is unclear whether the dispute over Libyan terrorism was responsible.
General Kerekou was also told that the United States might not be able to help support Benin in negotiations for World Bank loans unless the matter were resolved.

Graphic

 
map of Benin


End of Document