U.S. Bomb Squad Is Growing
The New York Times
September 6, 1988, Tuesday, Late City Final Edition


Copyright 1988 The New York Times Company
Section: Section B; Page 7, Column 2; National Desk
Length: 350 words
Byline: AP
Dateline: EGLIN AIR FORCE BASE, Fla., Sept. 5
Body


The military's bomb squad is nearly doubling as the United States tries to respond to world terrorism, a Navy officer says.
The Navy recently opened a $18.6 million training center here to teach technicians how to deal with explosives.
The move was a reponse to ''the growing threat of international terrorism,'' said Lieut. Comdr. H. F. Mixter, the officer in charge.
Other factors he cited in a recent interview was that ''the world's weaponry is far more sophisticated than it used to be,'' and changes in battlefield strategies. But he declined to be more specific, saying that information was classified.
 
All Branches at School
The Eglin school, one of only two of its kind in the United States military, trains Army, Air Force, Marine and some foreign military students, as well as Navy personnel.
Defense Department officials decided to build the school three years ago, after a survey showed that an 89 percent increase in explosives ordnance demolition technicians would be required by the four services from 1985 to 1990, Commander Mixter said.
The school was built at Eglin, a 724- square-mile air base on the Florida Panhandle, because it had enough space to accommodate the school. That space allows for test ranges where explosives can be set off. And the region's normally temperate weather permits year-round outdoor activity.
Another factor is that, of the few bases meeting those criteria, Eglin is the closest to the Naval Explosive Ordnance Disposal School at Indian Head, Md., the military's only other center for bomb squad training.
 
Common Training Pays Off
The new school has a staff of 23 officers and 160 enlisted personnel. About 45 officers and 280 enlisted people are in training at any given time; about 20 percent are women. The school expects to graduate 1,200 students each year.
Commander Mixter said the common training for all branches, relatively rare in the American military, pays off when explosive ordnance demolition technicians from different services work together in the field. ''Regardless of the service, you know that he knows what you know,'' the commander said.


End of Document