U.S. SIGNALS IRAN ON BETTER RELATIONS;
SEES POLITICAL SHIFT AT TOP IN TEHRAN, CHANCE TO END SPONSORSHIP OF TERRORISM
Pittsburgh Post-Gazette (Pennsylvania)
July 9, 1997, Wednesday,
SOONER EDITION


Copyright 1997 P.G. Publishing Co.
Section: WORLD,
Length: 623 words
Byline: ROBIN WRIGHT, LOS ANGELES TIMES
Dateline: WASHINGTON
Body


In the most serious U.S. attempt in a decade to engage Iran in dialogue, the Clinton administration quietly has signaled through diplomatic channels that it wants to improve the volatile relationship between Tehran and Washington.
''We would like to end the estrangement,'' a senior Clinton administration official said yesterday. ''And we are now looking for ways to accomplish that goal.''
The United States seeks to take advantage of a political shift inside Iran, symbolized by a presidential election upset in May, and to do so soon enough to prevent a potential confrontation if the Islamic republic is eventually tied to the 1996 bombing of a military complex in Saudi Arabia that killed 19 U.S. airmen.
A Saudi dissident now in U.S. custody has been implicated in that bombing, and officials suspect he has ties to Iranian-sponsored militants.
Saudi Arabia has been a central intermediary in relaying the U.S. message to Iran, the official said. Abdul Aziz al-Abdallah al-Khweater, a senior member of the Saudi Council of Ministers, outlined U.S. terms for eventual rapprochement during a visit to Tehran last week.
U.S. officials apparently are looking to Iran for a significant step away from its sponsorship of international terrorism. As an early signal of Iranian intent, the official said, Washington will watch president-elect Mohammed Khatami's cabinet appointments, which are expected before he takes office Aug. 3.
The United States is particularly interested in the ministries of intelligence and interior, the two posts that have been linked with promoting extremism. Intelligence Minister Ali Fallahian has been linked in a German court to Iranian-backed plots to assassinate dissidents abroad. His departure is considered essential to improved relations.
''Iran has proven in recent years that it is capable of changing its behavior in ways we could deal with it,'' the senior official said.
For example, the official said, Iran ''has a working relationship with the Russians despite strong ideological differences.'' Iran and Russia, deeply at odds over Afghanistan during Soviet occupation, are now even backing the same side against the fundamentalist Islamic Taliban forces in that country.
If relations with the United States improved enough that the administration ended its policy of economic isolation, Iran could, among other things, gain access to badly needed Western technology and oil equipment for its outdated oil industry.
But senior administration officials fear that before the new Iranian government has a chance to respond to U.S. overtures, the Khobar bombing investigation could develop conclusive evidence pointing to Iranian involvement.
Khatami will need time to consolidate his hold on power in a faction-riddled political environment before he can take any bold steps to improve relations with the United States.
''We would love to see Iran take action that shows response to our concerns - and to do something before momentum takes over on (Capitol Hill) or among other quarters that would make it difficult to argue the case for dealing with Iran again any time soon,'' the senior official said.
A possible source of such evidence is the Saudi dissident being held in the U.S.: Hani Abdel Rahim Hussein al-Sayegh, who may have been a driver and lookout in the attack, according to information provided the United States primarily from Saudi officials.
Both Saudi Arabia and Israel, two countries usually at opposite poles on regional tensions, have urged Washington not to retaliate against Tehran if evidence proves that Iran had a direct hand in the Khobar attack, high-level U.S. sources say. Israeli Prime Minister Benjamin Netanyahu has made the case personally with the administration, they add.

Load-Date: July 10, 1997


End of Document