UA Researcher Studies Lone Wolf Terrorism
Arkansas Traveler: University of Arkansas
February 27, 2014 Thursday


University Wire
Copyright 2014 UWIRE via U-Wire All Rights Reserved
Section: NEWS; Pg. 1
Length: 285 words
Byline: Ginny Monk
Body


Attacks by "lone wolf" terrorists have been fewer in the past 10 years following 9/11, according to a study conducted by a UA professor studying terrorism.
Jeff Gruenewald said he has been conducting research on issues of domestic terrorism for nearly a decade, along with Steven Chermak from Michigan State University and Joshua D. Freilich from John Jay College City University of New York.
"We've begun to examine lone wolf homicides committed by offenders who were affiliated with the far-right extremist movement in the United States," Gruenewald said.
Gruenewald also said that findings published last year generally support many of the assumptions we have about terrorists who operate alone.
"For instance, while far-right lone wolf incidents, in general, were fewer after the 9/11 attacks, attacks perpetrated by those who were acting entirely independently of other extremists, or 'loners,' were actually significantly more likely to occur after 9/11," Gruenewald said. "We also found that loners were much more likely to be alienated from society, struggle with mental health issues and rely on firearms more than other types of weapons compared to other types of far-rightist terrorists."
This study is not the first to be done on terrorism at the UofA. The UA Terrorism Research Center was established in 2003 and is part of the Fulbright College. The TRC is host to the American Terrorism Study, the nation's longest running study on terrorism in the United States.
In past years, the strategies to create terror have changed to smaller-scale attacks, such as the shooting at Fort Hood or the attacks on the New York City Subway system, and involve more work from within the country, according to the FBI.

Load-Date: February 27, 2014


End of Document