UC-Berkeley faculty, staff ordered to carry ID cards on campus
University Wire
March 18, 2003, Tuesday


Copyright 2003 Daily Californian via U-Wire
Length: 302 words
Byline: By Yenie Ra, Daily Californian
Dateline: Berkeley, Calif.
Body


All university staff and faculty were mandated Monday to carry University of California at Berkeley identification cards on campus, in an effort to secure the campus against the growing threat of terrorism.
In the same memorandum, which was issued by Chancellor Robert Berdahl's office, UC police asked faculty and staff to help secure the campus against terrorism.
U. California-Berkeley
The FBI warned in recent weeks that terrorists could attack "soft targets" like universities. The federal government last night also raised the national terror alert to "orange," the second-highest level.
A U.S. attack on Iraq could incite terrorism, President Bush warned last night.
"The issue came up because of the impending war and security on campus," said Associate Chancellor John Cummins.
People should report suspicious cars, people and activity, UC police said Monday. Police also told faculty and staff to secure "sensitive areas," such as laboratories.
Just as in airports, police warned that bags in public areas should be attended at all times.
Most UC employees already have photo identification cards, but those without one can get one from the Cal Photo ID office located in lower Sproul Plaza.
While most UC Berkeley students find academic life nearly impossible without student identification cards, faculty and staff members could enter secured buildings without UC Berkeley identification.
The new policy, in isolation, is not a great departure from university policy. Most universities already have similar requirements for their staff and faculty, according to the memorandum.
"This [requiring identifications] is not anything out of the ordinary," said political science lecturer Darren Zook, who studies terrorism. "It just sounds like a precautionary measure."
(C) 2002 Daily Californian via U-WIRE

Load-Date: March 18, 2003


End of Document