UCF introduces new degrees for upcoming semesters
Central Florida Future: University of Central Florida
April 2, 2014 Wednesday


University Wire
Copyright 2014 UWIRE via U-Wire All Rights Reserved
Section: NEWS; Pg. 1
Length: 819 words
Byline: Noelle Campbell
Body


This fall, current and incoming students will have more possibilities regarding their area of study. UCF plans on adding several new programs, including a master's degree, a bachelor's degree, minors and certificates.
The university will be adding two degrees to its registry: a Bachelor of Arts in writing and rhetoric and a professional science master's degree in nanotechnology.
These additions were voted on at the UCF Board of Trustees meeting on Thursday. According to the meeting agenda, both degrees met the criteria for authorization by proving their benefit to the school, students and community. The nanotechnology degree will be the only P.S.M. program of its kind in the state of Florida, according to the proposal. Large companies around UCF such as Siemens and Lockheed Martin are already doing small-scale research, said Sudipta Seal, director of the Advanced Materials Processing and Analysis Center and NanoScience Technology Center. Seal said he hopes this program will train the next generation of scientists, engineers and technologists.
"Nano[technology] is one of those areas that is very interdisciplinary," Seal said. "A combination of sciences and engineering and business, as well."
The program will offer four main courses, some of which are nanobiotechnology and nanoelectronic devices. In addition, an internship is required of the graduate students, which Seal believes will help them get jobs more quickly after graduation. The conservative estimate for the number of students admitted to this program is 10, although there is no upper limit, Seal said. Students interested in the program should apply within the next month or two for admission in fall. Additionally, a writing and rhetoric major will begin its course in August. The program, which is currently only offered as a minor, will provide students with courses that will prepare them for writing-focused jobs and teach them how to write more effectively.
The new degree will be comprised of three core components, said Blake Scott, the director of degree programs at the Writing and Rhetoric center. This includes the classes, an internship and a capstone course. The latter two will use the skills gained in the classes to help students create an e-portfolio.
"Courses range from argumentative and civic to professional and multimedia writing," Scott said.
Many of the classes will be capped at 25 students. Students who would like to change their writing and rhetoric minor into the major will be able to transfer the credits earned in their previous classes. However, in doing so, the student must choose another minor or certificate in a different area of study. The new major will not be in an English track, thereby making it the only freestanding writing and rhetoric major in the state of Florida. The Department of Writing and Rhetoric will be holding two open houses for students who are considering the major, in order for them to meet with the faculty and learn about classes and job opportunities, Scott said. The open houses will be on Thursday, April 17 from 2 p.m. to 4 p.m. and Friday, April 18 from 10 a.m. to noon in 401 Colbourn Hall.
"Students who can't make either event should make an advising appointment," Scott said.
Students can reach the department at writingandrhetoric@ucf.edu Other new programs for undergraduate students include a Florida studies minor in the College of Arts and Humanities, and a terrorism studies minor in the College of Sciences, said Heath Martin, the interim associate dean of the Office of Undergraduate Studies and Academic Services. The terrorism studies minor will cover topics such as international terrorism and intelligence, said Kerstin Hamann, department chair of political science. In addition, there will be two new undergraduate certificates available in human biology and engineering leadership, Martin said. Graduate certificates coming to UCF next year are criminal justice and student athlete support services, said Rhonda Nelson, senior administrative assistant in the College of Graduate Studies. The number of new degrees varies every year, depending on society's needs for specific lines of work.
"New degrees and majors are driven by demand," said Ross Hinkle, vice provost and dean of the College of Graduate Studies.
Degree proposals can arise from the public community, which could see a need for a certain occupation, or through the departments of the university, which might witness rising trends in society or in the workforce. In order to have a degree approved, the department must submit a proposal to a university program review committee, where the board of trustees approves or denies it. For higher degrees, such as a Ph.D., the proposal must be sent to the board of governors for approval.
"A university is the education source for a community," Hinkle said. "As times change and technology develops, the university will try to respond to that."
 

Load-Date: April 3, 2014


End of Document