UCF Police prepares for possibility of crisis
Central Florida Future: University of Central Florida
September 25, 2013 Wednesday


University Wire
Copyright 2013 UWIRE via U-Wire All Rights Reserved
Section: NEWS; Pg. 1
Length: 577 words
Byline: Fred Lambert
Body


The shooting deaths of 12 people at the Washington Navy Yard last Monday featured an eerie element: The shooter had complete access to the base in which he committed his crimes. Earlier this month, the UCF Police Department worked in conjunction with the U.S. Army Research Laboratory, the Orange County Sheriff's Office and Orange County Fire Rescue to train for if a similar scenario were to happen in the UCF area.
The exercise - known as Anti-Terrorism Exercise, or ATX - was set up by the Army's Simulation and Training Technology Center and took place the morning of Sept. 4. A cacophony of blank gunfire, simulated improvised explosive devices and actors set a realistic training scene for first responders to handle.
The exercise kicked off when four OP4's - opposing forces or trainers playing bad guys - pulled up in a van, stole an ID card from an employee and made entry to coordinate attacks in and around the Simulation and Training Technology Center, located in Research Park. The OP4s were members of Orange County Sheriff's SWAT, Michelle Milliner, a public affairs specialist with the Simulation and Training Technology Center, said.
Milliner said that the exercise is a requirement by the U.S. Army to test the combined response from employees at the facility with that of first responders.
"We're trying to practice how we all communicate with each other," Milliner said. "In the past, we've even coordinated with the Department of Homeland Security office locally to create that unified response to terrorism at the facility."
Multiple groups of deputies from Orange County Sheriff's went through variations of the exercise throughout the morning under supervision from UCF Police and OCSO training officers.
The deputies were equipped with Multiple Integrated Laser Engagement System gear, a simulation device akin to laser tag. The MILES system utilizes black sensors that register hits from laser-emitting devices, which are triggered by blanks from real rifles. A beeping sound indicates you've been hit. Blank firing adapters were fitted to the officer's rifles to prevent injury, and yellow smoke seeped from the mock IEDs, adding to the simulated chaos.
Orange County Fire Rescue came on scene behind police to give first aid to the wounded (played by bleeding mannequins and actors with gory make-up). Some of them wore MILES gear as well and were subject to attack by the OP4s.
Officer Curt Myhre, a training officer with the UCF Police, said that police and fire departments work together every day but rarely get the opportunity to train together in an unfamiliar building.
"They're going into a strange place like they would in real life and interacting with police officers and fire department personnel that they don't know, because they haven't worked together before," Myhre said. "So it's good training for us to work out our little kinks. Police and fire departments use different codes and things like that."
The exercise benefited the Simulation and Training Technology Center as well, which didn't just supply the special effects. Employees also acted the part of innocent bystanders and were advised to stay put in their offices and take cover.
"Every year the scenario changes, requiring the people and residents within our building to react differently," Milliner said. "It's basically meant to train."
No concerned students or faculty called to inquire about the sounds of the exercise, Grant Heston of UCF News and Information said.

Load-Date: September 26, 2013


End of Document