UCLA events decry war on terrorism
University Wire
February 9, 2005 Wednesday


Copyright 2005 Daily Bruin via U-Wire
Length: 600 words
Byline: By Noah Cason-Zesiger, Daily Bruin; SOURCE: U. California-Los Angeles
Dateline: LOS ANGELES 
Body


University of California at Los Angeles groups opposed to the Bush administration's policies abroad and at home held an "Hour of Resistance" at Bruin Plaza on Tuesday in an attempt to rekindle the flame of student activism against the war.
The protest was organized by the California Student Sustainability Coalition, the United Arab Society and other groups.
Despite differences in background, the speakers all stressed a need for unity in opposition and revitalized activism, especially among students.
The event "went really well, and there was a decent turnout considering midterms," Megan Carney, one of the event organizers, said.
One speaker, Tim Goodrich, said he served tours of duty with the air force in Iraq and Afghanistan and returned home to co-found Veterans Against the War.
Goodrich drew cheers when he called for the troops to come home, financial support for Iraqi reconstruction, and a renewed commitment to veterans.
Later, Goodrich yelled at a large flock of passing students, "What are you doing to end this illegal war?"
Some Bruin Republicans passed by during Goodrich's speech and stopped to give their perspective.
"The way I see things, Iraqi people gave the finger to tyranny by voting. Today, people are giving the finger to democracy," David Lazar, second-year pre-economics student and regional director of the Bruin Republicans, said.
"You'd think they'd be celebrating the progress that was made instead of condemning the liberators," Lazar added.
Yousef Tajsar, a fifth-year political science student whose parents are Iraqi refugees, spoke about how he felt oil was not the major reason for the U.S. invasion of Iraq.
"They destroyed Iraqi infrastructure so that they could use American corporations to rebuild. Iraq has money to give to American corporations," Tajsar said.
The protestors' ranks appeared to be inflated by passing students and people lounging outside Ackerman Union, and Carney admitted that the majority of protesters belonged to the organizations that put on the event.
"In terms of securing a bigger audience, we need to be sure to get in touch with other groups," she said. "Passing out flyers is not enough. Students just assume it will happen."
While the demonstrations occurred at Bruin Plaza, a small group of graduate students spoke at Meyerhoff Park against the war in Iraq and the war against lower-income communities.
Leaders of the Raza Graduate Student Association and other Chicano and Latino student groups on campus spoke about the injustices being incurred by communities of color.
Speakers spoke mostly to visiting high school students against military recruitment and alleged reports of police brutality that is more prominent in lower income communities.
After the Raza demonstration ended, members of that group joined the protest in Bruin Plaza.
When the speakers finished, there were performances by spoken word artists Mark Gonzales and Amir, and a mix of original and well-known songs performed by Ronney Shantouf and Morgan Kays.
The event culminated with a march up Bruin Walk and across campus, during which the group of about 15 remaining protesters chanted slogans such as, "We don't want no occupation; we just want our education."
Onlookers met the marchers with reactions varying from mild interest to outright contempt. One student, seeing the marchers passing by Powell library, stood up, saying, "I'm leaving. I can't watch this."
Although the march had a low turnout, Carney said she was encouraged by the experience.
"We learned a lot, and we want to continue. This was a great starter," Carney said.
(C) 2005 Daily Bruin via U-WIRE

Load-Date: February 9, 2005


End of Document