UI student ill-treated, lawyer says Al-Hussayen accused of routing money to groups connected to world terrorism
Spokesman Review (Spokane, WA)
April 5, 2003 Saturday Idaho Edition


Copyright 2003 Spokane Spokesman-Review
Section: HANDLE; Pg.B1
Length: 511 words
Byline: Hannelore Sudermann, Staff writer
Body


Attorneys for a University of Idaho student accused of routing money to
 groups linked to international terrorism say that some of his jail treatment
 has been ''cruel and unusual."
 Sami Omar Al-Hussayen, 34, is currently in the Ada County Jail but may soon
 be moved to less-pleasant conditions in a neighboring county, his attorneys
 say.
 Federal authorities allege that Al-Hussayen set up and maintained Web sites
 for groups that supported terrorist actions and that he funneled money to an
 organization that funded terrorism.
From the time the FBI arrested the Saudi Arabian student on charges of
 immigration fraud in Moscow, Idaho, Feb. 26, until March 24, Al-Hussayen had
 been held at the Ada County Jail in Boise. Though a U.S. magistrate judge
 ordered the release of Al-Hussayen, the Bureau of Citizenship and Immigration
 Services stepped in to keep him in federal custody.
 From March 24 until this week, Al-Hussayen was held 40 miles outside of
 Boise at the Canyon County Jail in Caldwell, where he was kept isolated in a
 small cell known as ''the hole," according to an affidavit filed in U.S.
 District Court by his attorney Thursday.
 The cell is usually used for the most dangerous, threatening inmates, said
 David Nevin, Al-Hussayen's attorney. But according to officials at the Canyon
 County Sheriff's office, Al-Hussayen was in ''the hole" for his own
 protection from other inmates, said Nevin's affidavit.
 While in Canyon County, ''Mr. Al-Hussayen is locked in the cell 23 hours
 per day for five days of the week, and 24 hours per day for the remaining two
 days," Nevin says in the affidavit.
 Al-Hussayen can use his one hour out of the cell to shower, call his
 family, or call his attorneys.
 According to Nevin, the distance to the Canyon County Jail harms his
 ability to work with his client.
 With the large amount of back ground material in this case, Nevin needs to
 meet with Al-Hussayen sometimes more than once a day and for significant
 amounts of time, he said.
 Keeping the UI student in Canyon County violates his Sixth Amendment right
 to have the assistance of counsel for his defense, said the attorney's
 affidavit.
 In Canyon County, Al-Hussayen is not allowed nonreligious reading materials
 and has no access to a radio or television. Other than the Quran and several
 books about Islam, he has a prayer rug, a prayer schedule, a battery-operated
 clock, a contact lens case and a toothbrush, according to his attorney.
 Nevin in his affidavit called it ''cruel and unusual punishment,"
 particularly for a man who has presented no disciplinary problem to his
 jailers.
 Because of the location and detention conditions, Al-Hussayen was moved
 back to the Ada County Jail on April 1, but may be returned to Canyon County
 next week. Due to a contract issue with Ada County's jail, all Bureau of
 Citizenship and Immigration Services prisoners are scheduled to be moved to
 the neighboring county.
 Al-Hussayen's attorneys will appear in U.S. District Court in Boise at 11
 a.m. Monday to argue against moving Al-Hussayen, citing emotional and physical
 hardship.

Notes

Changed in Spokane edition.

Load-Date: April 9, 2003


End of Document