UK court backs detention of journalist's partner; Justices say he had files stolen by Edward Snowden
The Tampa Tribune (Florida)
February 20, 2014 Thursday


Copyright 2014 Times Publishing Company All Rights Reserved
Section: NATION & WORLD; NationWorld; Pg. 33
Length: 325 words
Byline: The Associated Press
Dateline: LONDON 
Highlight: British High Court: Detention of partner of key journalist in Edward Snowden leaks was lawful
Body


 - Britain's High Court on Wednesday endorsed the decision by police to hold journalist Glenn Greenwald's partner at a London airport on terrorism grounds last summer. The ruling sent chills through free expression advocates and media groups.
The panel of three judges said London's Metropolitan Police officers acted properly when they invoked Britain's Terrorism Act to stop David Miranda at Heathrow Airport on Aug. 18, seizing encrypted devices and questioning him for nearly nine hours.
Writing on the panel's behalf, Lord Justice John Laws said the devices contained a large number of files stolen by former National Security Agency contractor Edward Snowden, including nearly 60,000 highly classified UK intelligence documents.
The detention was a proportionate measure in the circumstances, Laws said. He said the objective - finding out whether there was anything in the files that might be a boon to terrorists - was not only legitimate, but very pressing.
Both sides acknowledge Miranda was carrying intelligence documents at the time he was detained on his way from Germany back to Brazil. But defenders of the 28-year-old student argue the documents amounted to raw material for Greenwald's reporting on the National Security Agency, which has rattled the intelligence establishment and sparked a broad-based movement to rein in or at least reform the agency's domestic surveillance programs.
The government, they say, wasn't trying to determine whether there was anything in Miranda's files that could help terrorists. Rather, it arbitrarily targeted him as a terror suspect to seize his files and intimidate his colleagues.
The use of terror legislation in this case has drawn widespread criticism.
Rosie Brighouse, a legal officer with London-based Liberty, said the law had been used in a blatantly abusive way, while Paris-based Reporters Without Borders demoted the U.K. three ranks in its World Press Freedom Index following the incident.

Load-Date: February 20, 2014


End of Document