UK ex-model claims ISIS recruiter groomed her to be next White Widow
Metro Vartha
June 21, 2018 Thursday


Copyright 2018 Vartha News Network Pvt Ltd All Rights Reserved
Length: 319 words
Dateline: London 
Body


London, June 21 -- A former UK glamour model has claimed she was groomed by a Pakistani-origin ISIS recruiter to become the next "White Widow" in Syria.Kimberley Miners said she was brainwashed by the ISIS recruiter Naweed Hussain on Facebook who wanted to marry her and sent her "hundreds of messages" a day.Hussain, a Briton of Pakistani-origin who joined ISIS in Syria in June 2015, was killed last year.The 29-year-old Miners told The Sun that ISIS operatives wanted her to become the next "White Widow", she said, referring to Sally Jones, another British female recruit from Kent who moved to Syria with her son and was killed in an airstrike last year."I was totally taken in. I was groomed and I fell for it. I was a propaganda trophy to be won. 
I dread to think what would have happened," she said.The western girls who travel to Iraq and Syria to marry ISIS terrorists are described as White Widow.Miners was arrested after counter-terrorism police intercepted messages from Hussain asking her to come to Syria. Police directed her to take a terrorism prevention course, but she dropped out and was arrested in October 2016.She was released with no further action in March last year but said she had been warned that she could spend 10 years in prison.Miners said that she had taken to social media after losing her baby and fiance and "was all alone".She added: "I was upset by what was happening in Syria to the children. I started sharing videos of bomb attacks. I soon started receiving lots of friend requests from people in Syria."It's embarrassing now but I liked the attention. People have no idea, but ISIS is actively searching Facebook for vulnerable people. People just like me."
Published by HT Digital Content Services with permission from MetroVaartha English. For any query with respect to this article or any other content requirement, please contact Editor at content.services@htlive.com

Load-Date: June 21, 2018


End of Document