UK police treat Parliament crash as terrorism
Spokesman Review (Spokane, WA)
August 15, 2018 Wednesday
Main Edition


Copyright 2018 Spokane Spokesman-Review
Section: A; Pg. 003
Length: 397 words
Body


World
 LONDON  - Police flooded central London streets and cordoned off the city's government district Tuesday, after a speeding car plowed into cyclists and crashed outside Parliament in what authorities were treating as an act of terrorism.
 With the driver in custody, counterterror detectives were working to uncover the motive behind what they suspect is the fourth vehicle attack in Britain - and the second on Parliament - in 18 months.
 "Given that this appears to be a deliberate act, the method and this being an iconic site, we are treating it as a terrorist incident," Assistant Commissioner Neil Basu, Britain's top counterterrorism officer, told reporters.
 A rooftop camera recorded the silver Ford Fiesta driving past Parliament and suddenly veering sharply to the left, striking cyclists waiting at a set of lights, then crossing the road and crashing into a barrier outside Parliament. Armed police surrounded the car within seconds, pulling a man from the vehicle. Police said the driver was alone and no weapons were found in the car. Three people were hurt, none critically.
Italian bridge collapse  kills 26, another 15 injured
 MILAN  - A 51-year-old highway bridge in the Italian port city of Genoa collapsed in a driving rain Tuesday, killing at least 26 people and injuring 15 others as it sent dozens of vehicles tumbling into a heap of concrete and twisted steel.
 Italian Premier Giuseppe Conte called it "an immense tragedy."
 The disaster, on a major interchange connecting Genoa and other northern cities in eastern Liguria into France, focused attention on Italy's aging infrastructure, particularly its concrete bridges and viaducts built in the postwar boom of the 1950s and 1960s.
 What caused the Morandi Bridge to fall remained unknown, and prosecutors said they were opening an investigation but had not identified any targets. Transport Minister Danilo Toninelli said the collapse was "unacceptable" and that if negligence played a role "whoever made a mistake must pay."
 Early speculation focused on the structural weakness of the span.
 The nearly 150-foot bridge collapsed in a torrential rain during midday traffic on the eve of a major holiday that sees most Italians abandoning cities for beaches and mountains.
 Civil Protection authorities said at least 30 cars and three heavy vehicles were on the 260-foot section that collapsed.
 From wire reports

Load-Date: August 15, 2018


End of Document