Ukrainian Film Director Jailed in Russia Is Said to End Hunger Strike
The New York Times 
October 5, 2018 Friday 12:01 EST


Copyright 2018 The New York Times Company All Rights Reserved
Section: WORLD; europe
Length: 620 words
Byline: Oleg Matsnev
Highlight: Oleg Sentsov, an outspoken critic of the annexation of Crimea, is in prison on terrorism charges that many consider spurious. His protest started in May.
Body


MOSCOW — A Ukrainian film director who was sentenced to 20 years in jail in Russia in 2015 is ending a hunger strike that has lasted 144 days, Russian news media reported on Friday, citing a prison official and a statement passed on by his lawyer.
The director, Oleg Sentsov, is seen in much of the Western world as a political prisoner convicted on spurious charges of conspiracy to commit acts of terrorism as a result of his outspoken criticism of the 2014 annexation of his native Crimea.
Mr. Sentsov, who lived in Simferopol, Crimea, was considered a promising director. His film “Gamer,” about a computer-game-obsessed Ukrainian teenager, was shown at the International Film Festival Rotterdam in 2012.
He was active in protests against the pro-Kremlin government of Viktor F. Yanukovych, who was toppled as president of Ukraine in February 2014, and activists have described how he helped evacuate Ukrainian servicemen who were blockaded in Crimea after the Russian takeover.
Prosecutors accused him of creating a Crimean branch of a Ukrainian nationalist group that is banned in Russia — he denied it, as did the group — and of setting fire to the offices of pro-Kremlin organizations in Crimea.
Mr. Sentsov began his hunger strike in May to demand the release of Ukrainian political prisoners held in Russian jails. Initial news reports attributed the news that he was stopping fasting to Valery Maksimenko, the deputy director of the Russian Federal Penitentiary Service.
Later on Friday, the Russian newspaper Novaya Gazeta published what it said was a copy of a statement from Mr. Sentsov, passed through his lawyer, Dmitry Dinze, declaring that he would end his hunger strike on Saturday because he had faced imminent force-feeding.
“Supposedly I’m not able to be realistic about state of my health and health risks,” the statement read in part. “Force feeding is going to be part of a resuscitation procedure to save the patient’s life.
“In current circumstances I’m bound to end my hunger strike starting tomorrow, the 6th of October, 2018. 145 days of struggle, 20 kilos less in weight, strained body, but goal still not achieved. I’m grateful to everyone who supported me and apologize to those whom I failed... Glory to Ukraine!”
Mr. Maksimenko was quoted by the website Mediazona as saying that Mr. Sentsov had been warned “two or three months ago” that prisoners could be taken for force-feeding at a civilian hospital if their state of health was deemed to be dangerous.
Last Friday, the prison service released pictures showing Mr. Sentsov receiving a medical checkup in which he looked pale and emaciated.
“The best nutrition experts in Moscow have developed a special diet to pull him out of the hunger strike,” Mr. Maksimenko was quoted as saying by the news agency Interfax.
Mr. Sentsov signed a statement in the presence of his lawyers to declare that his hunger strike would come to an end, Mikhail Fedotov, the head of Russia’s Presidential Human Rights Council, told the news agency RIA Novosti, adding that he “welcomed” the decision.
There was no word of any concessions toward Mr. Sentsov’s demands.
Mr. Sentsov’s lawyers and relatives could not be reached for independent confirmation of the reports.
The film director apparently lost about 70 pounds while on the hunger strike. His lawyer has previously objected to his incarceration in a penal colony above the Arctic Circle, saying the extreme cold had given Mr. Sentsov health problems.
PHOTO: The Ukrainian filmmaker Oleg Sentsov undergoing a physical examination on Sept. 28. He is an outspoken critic of Russia’s 2014 annexation of his native Crimea. (PHOTOGRAPH BY Russian Federal Penitentiary Service, via Associated Press FOR THE NEW YORK TIMES)

Load-Date: October 18, 2018


End of Document