UKRANIAN BLASTS LEAVE 27 INJURED
Pittsburgh Post-Gazette
April 27, 2012 Friday
PITTSBURGH PRESS EDITION


Copyright 2012 P.G. Publishing Co.
Section: WORLD; Pg. A-3
Length: 273 words
Byline: Maria Danilova, Associated Press
Body


KIEV, Ukraine -- A series of blasts rocked an eastern Ukrainian city today, injuring 27 people, including nine teenagers, in what authorities say they believe was a terrorist attack.
Top law enforcement officials rushed to Dnipropetrovsk, about 250 miles southeast of Kiev, to investigate but there was no immediate claim of responsibility. The violence undermined Ukraine's security just weeks before it co-hosts the European soccer championships in June.
President Viktor Yanukovych vowed to investigate and punish the perpetrators.
"This is yet another challenge for us, for the whole country," Mr. Yanukovych told reporters in televised comments. "We will think of how to respond to this properly."
Ukraine has not been afflicted with political terrorism but there have been previous explosions connected to criminal extortion.
The opposition party led by jailed former prime minister Yulia Tymoshenko, however, suggested that Mr. Yanukovych's government may have organized the blasts in order to deflect the world's attention from Mr. Tymoshenko's imprisonment and reported abuse in prison.
The president's office declined to comment on the opposition charges.
The first of four explosions today in Dnipropetrovsk rocked a tram stop shortly before noon, injuring 13 people, said Emergency Situations Ministry spokeswoman Yulia Yershova. The bomb was planted in a garbage bin.
The second bomb, also planted in a garbage bin, went off about 40 minutes later near a movie theater and a trade school, injuring two adults and nine teenagers. A third blast in the city center wounded three people and a fourth, also downtown, caused no casualties.

Graphic

 
PHOTO: Dmitriy Dvorsky/Associated Press: People assist an injured person after an explosion in Dnipropetrovsk, Ukraine, today. Officials say four blasts within minutes rocked the center of the eastern Ukrainian city, injuring dozens of people, including schoolchildren.

Load-Date: April 28, 2012


End of Document