UN General Assembly To Vote On Resolution Condemning Hamas Terrorism
Stillman Advance: Stillman College
November 30, 2018 Friday


University Wire
Copyright 2018 UWIRE via U-Wire All Rights Reserved
Section: WORLD-NEWS; Pg. 1
Length: 415 words
Byline: Steven Clarke
Body


Oh, it's just another day where someone is calling for the destruction of Israel.
Hill, 39, who later admitted on Twitter that he has never been to Israel, also endorsed BDS: "We must promote nonviolence at every opportunity, but can not endorse narrow politics that shames Palestinians for resisting, for refusing to do nothing in ethnic cleansing".
He stated that Hamas would "greatly count on the members of the UN General Assembly to stand by global legitimacy in support for the right of peoples to defend themselves and thwart these aggressive American endeavors".
Mr. Hill, whose remarks were widely denounced by Jewish groups, including the Anti-Defamation League, denied Thursday calling for Israel's destruction and insisted he was not anti-Semitic.
CNN has fired longtime contributorMarc Lamont Hill after controversial comments he made about Palestine and Israel during a speech he made yesterday at the United Nations.
Tesla's Chinese Sales Are Plummeting
In July, Beijing raised tariffs on imports of US autos to 40 percent amid a worsening trade standoff with the United States. Unlike most USA automakers that releases monthly sales figures, Tesla discloses sales numbers only four times a year.
He accused the Israeli government of "normalizing settler colonialism" and called fora "free Palestine from the river to the sea," a remark that got applause from participating diplomats.
"I am deeply critical of Israeli policy and practice". Hill stressed that, although peace is an ideal, "we must not romanticize or fetishize it".
A resolution to condemn the Hamas terrorist group that rules the Gaza Strip is expected to be circulated within the General Assembly on Thursday, the anniversary of the November 29, 1947 Partition Plan that called for the creation in British Mandatory Palestine of two states, one Jewish and the other Arab. No part of this is a call to destroy Israel.
"If we are standing in solidarity with the Palestinian people, we must recognize the right of an occupied people to defend itself", Hill said during a portion of his speech comparing the Palestinian movement with the American civil-rights movement.
"Marc Lamont Hill is no longer under contract with CNN", a spokesperson for the cable network told Fox News. The speech very clearly and specifically said those things. "Neither CNN nor Temple should countenance anti-Semitism, and their failure to take swift action and terminate Dr. Hill would make them complicit in sanctioning bigotry and anti-Semitism".

Load-Date: November 30, 2018


End of Document