UN to vote on Haley's last stand: condemning Hamas
Stillman Advance: Stillman College
December 7, 2018 Friday


University Wire
Copyright 2018 UWIRE via U-Wire All Rights Reserved
Section: WORLD-NEWS; Pg. 1
Length: 579 words
Byline: Steven Clarke
Body


But in a vote moments earlier, the Assembly had decided that the Hamas resolution would need two-thirds of nations present to affirm, and the voting results failed to surpass that required level.
The representative of Kuwait called for respecting relevant United Nations resolutions in efforts to address the Palestinian-Israeli conflict and stressed the importance of a two State solution based on pre-1967 borders.
The vote was symbolically important because, from the time Haley arrived at the U.N.in January 2017, she has made a point of trying to turn the tide of what the Trump administration considers overwhelmingly anti-Israel resolutions and this vote illustrated what an uphill battle that turned out to be.
The Hamas leader further noted that the vote against the US-drafted resolution is a tremendous achievement for the Palestinian people and all brotherly countries.
A USA bid at theUnited Nations to condemn the Palestinian Hamas movement for firing rockets at Israel failed to secure enough votes for adoption on Thursday, despite European backing. It also condemned attempts by Hamas to build tunnels into Israel and launch rockets at civilian areas. But it was not enough to meet the two-thirds threshold.
Prime Minister Benjamin Netanyahu's released a statement following the vote praising the countries that did vote to condemn Hamas despite the resolution's failure.
William Barr nominated by Donald Trump to be USA attorney general
Controversial interim Attorney General appointee Matthew Whitaker continues to serve in an acting role after Jeff Sessions resigned.
"Hamas tactics have changed again, as it has adopted still more methods of killing Israeli civilians and damaging Israeli civilian property. That, more than anything else, is a condemnation of theUnited Nations itself". She used her time at the General Assembly podium to challenge the Arab states.
"This resolution was really just an attempt to weaponise theUnited Nations against the Palestinian people, against their legitimate rights", he told Al Jazeera.
When Hamas eventually took control, Israel responded by enforcing a land, sea and air blockade on Gaza and banning its residents from working in Israel.
"I spoke to one government head who said he got telephone calls pressuring him from Iran, and the Arab League", Danon said. "That is something we should all think deeply about", she said, noting that the resolution was not a judgment one way or another on the peace process but "a foundational element of peace - that foundation is the rejection of terrorism, because we all know there can be no peace without a mutual agreement that terrorism is unacceptable". The ambassador for Saudi Arabia was fierce in his criticism of Israel. "Israel has no respect for this organization of which it is a member". "It tells us what side you are on - the side that does not care about the lives of innocent Israelis and innocent Palestinians who have fallen victim to the terrorists of Hamas".
The Comprehensive, Just and Lasting Peace in the Middle East resolution sponsored by Ireland urges to end the occupation of Palestinian territories by the state of Israel and reaffirms its support for the two-state solution. "I thank Ambassador Haley for her close cooperation in fighting for the truth that led to the formation of an unprecedented coalition for Israel and against terrorism".
President Trump confirmed Friday he will nominate State Department spokeswoman Heather Nauert to succeed Haley.

Load-Date: December 8, 2018


End of Document