Un-plugged! Mystery Web outage hits N. Korea
Daily News (New York)
December 23, 2014 Tuesday
SPORTS EXTRA EDITION


Copyright 2014 Daily News, L.P.


Section: NEWS; Pg. 14
Length: 402 words
Byline: BY ADAM EDELMAN NEW YORK DAILY NEWS
Body


SEE WHAT happens when you mess with Seth Rogen?
North Korea was plagued by massive and widespread Internet outages Monday - with one expert saying the country's connectivity was "totally down."
The outages began Sunday and were getting progressively worse, The Associated Press reported, leading to speculation the U.S. was retaliating against Kim Jong Un's rogue regime for its role in the epic Sony hack that led to the cancellation of the Rogen-James Franco flick "The Interview."
White House officials declined comment.
State Department spokeswoman Marie Harf said the U.S. response to the North Korean hackers who purportedly infiltrated Sony's internal servers could involve behind-the-scenes measures.
"We aren't going to discuss publicly operational details about the possible response options or comment on those kind of reports in any way except to say that as we implement our responses, some will be seen, some may not be seen," Harf said.
The outages follow the Sunday publication by the North Korean regime of a bizarre rant that accused the U.S. government of being closely involved in the production of "The Interview" and threatened attacks against "the White House, the Pentagon and the whole U.S. mainland" in retaliation if top officials don't apologize.
North Korean officials, through the country's state-run news agency, knocked the U.S. as a "cesspool of terrorism" in the 1,700-word diatribe.
"The army and people of (North Korea) are fully ready to stand in confrontation with the U.S. in all war spaces including cyber warfare space to blow up those citadels," the note stated.
"Our toughest counteraction will be boldly taken against the White House, the Pentagon and the whole U.S. mainland, the cesspool of terrorism, by far surpassing the 'symmetric counteraction' declared by Obama.
"This stand is taken . . . because the movie 'The Interview' is an undesirable and reactionary one justifying and inciting terrorism which should not be allowed in any country and any region," officials added. The bloviating came days after President Obama said North Korea was responsible for the massive hack into Sony Entertainment, which he labeled "cyber vandalism."
The hack and threats of violence against theaters planning to show the controversial comedy led Sony last week to cancel the $44 million film's release. The film depicts Rogen and Franco taking part in an assassination plot against Kim.

Graphic

 
NLVL

Load-Date: December 23, 2014


End of Document