UNCIVIL MEMOS; BUSH LAWYERS WERE READY TO SUBVERT LIBERTIES
Pittsburgh Post-Gazette (Pennsylvania)
March 10, 2009 Tuesday
SOONER EDITION


Copyright 2009 P.G. Publishing Co.
Section: EDITORIAL; Pg. B-6
Length: 342 words
Body


Last week the Obama Justice Department released Bush-era memos outlining some brazen views toward Americans' constitutional rights.
Memos written by Bush administration lawyers shortly after Sept. 11, 2001, argued that Fourth Amendment protections against unwarranted search and seizure on American soil could be set aside by the president during the protracted fight against terrorism.
Those lawyers also insisted that free speech and press rights could be subordinated to federal power during the fight against al-Qaida. They argued that President George W. Bush had broad powers that couldn't be checked by the legislative or judicial branches.
The memos represented a dramatic break with standard interpretations of presidential power. Attorney General Eric Holder summed up the Obama administration's take on its predecessor's legal theory:
"Too often over the past decade, the fight against terrorism has been viewed as a zero-sum battle with our civil liberties," he said. "Not only is that school of thought misguided, [but] I fear that, in actuality, it does more harm than good."
Just as troubling as the Bush legal memos was the CIA's destruction, according to the Justice Department, of 92 videotapes detailing the agency's interrogations of terror suspects. To those who think the worst, the CIA's actions go beyond outrageous. Critics accused the Bush administration of tolerating the torture of terror suspects almost from the beginning, but Bush officials denied the allegations.
Many of the legal conclusions to justify potential end-runs around the Constitution were abandoned by the Bush administration, but the paper trail of justification is damning.
President Barack Obama has said he isn't interested in prosecuting former Bush officials for missteps in the war on terror, but the documents suggest that our liberties were under question from within after Sept. 11.
Perhaps a federal court will never have the chance to weigh the evidence against Bush officials, but that doesn't mean the court of public opinion will look the other way.

Load-Date: March 10, 2009


End of Document