UNCOVERING TERRORISM IS A MURKY TASK
Pittsburgh Post-Gazette (Pennsylvania)
August 9, 1998, Sunday,
TWO STAR EDITION


Copyright 1998 P.G. Publishing Co.
Section: WORLD,
Length: 920 words
Byline: SUSANNE M. SCHAFER, THE ASSOCIATED PRESS
Dateline: WASHINGTON
Body


No matter how elusive or shadowy are the terrorists who bombed two American embassies in Africa, U.S. officials vow they will be tracked down. Experience has shown that can be a long and frustrating process, which has had mixed results.
President Clinton led the voices of determination. The bombers will be brought to justice, he said in his radio address yesterday, ''no matter how long it takes or where it takes us.''
It's a pursuit that can consume years, officials acknowledged Friday, only hours after the attacks on the U.S. missions in Kenya and Tanzania. But they insisted Washington has a long memory in these cases.
''We don't forgive. We don't forget,'' observed P.J. Crowley, spokesman for the National Security Council.
Even so, it has been a full two years since a major attack against a large U.S. facility in Saudi Arabia, and no one has been held accountable. The bombing of the Khobar Towers housing complex on June 25, 1996, killed 19 U.S. airmen and wounded 500.
The attack forced movement of thousands of American military men and women for their own protection into near prison-like encampments inside Saudi Arabia. It also instigated tightened security at American military installations around the globe.
Like the shadowy Khobar Towers bombers, those who set off the explosions in Africa that claimed more than 100 lives - among them at least 11 Americans have given little hint so far of who they are or the message they were trying to send. That can make it even harder to find them, U.S. officials say.
Defense Department intelligence officials and other government analysts said no warning came to the embassy in either capital, Nairobi, Kenya, or Dar es Salaam, Tanzania.
In recent months overseas installations have reported more instances of individuals who appeared to be looking them over in suspicious ways, a government official said. But the official said no overt threats were received that could have foreshadowed the African bombings.
He said the two attacks required many months of planning, citing the size of the bombs, the attacks' coordinated timing and the relatively easy targets that were chosen. Neither embassy had been updated with recent anti-terrorist blast protections.
U.S. intelligence officials will pore over records and other reports for any hint of what might have been intended as a warning, a defense official said. The official said finding such a signal, even after the fact, could help find the perpetrators.
A telephone caller purporting to represent a group called the Army for the Liberation of Islamic Shrines claimed responsibility in a call to the Cairo, Egypt, office of Al-Hayat, an Arabic-language newspaper published in London, the newspaper reported yesterday.
Another group, said to be a successor to the Muslim extremists who killed Egyptian President Anwar Sadat in 1981, threatened last week to strike American interests to avenge arrests of its members in Albania, Al-Hayat said in an earlier report.
One major suspect U.S. officials were quick to identify is Osama bin Laden, dissident exiled son of a wealthy Saudi family, who has vowed holy war against Americans. Bin Laden is alleged to have financed terror strikes around the world and is suspected in the Khobar Towers bombing.
''He has the money, he has the organization, and his people operate across the Middle East and Africa,'' the government official said.
Despite the lack of progress made on the Khobar Towers bombing, the security council's Crowley reminded reporters: ''We've had some success - some cases you've heard about, some cases you haven't.''
Some recent cases:
* It took four years, but the FBI tracked down and arrested in Pakistan the man accused of a 1993 shooting attack outside the CIA. Mir Amal Kasi was convicted and sentenced to death in January for killing two men in the assault-rifle ambush.
* Four militant Muslims were convicted for the 1993 bombing at the World Trade Center in New York that killed six people and injured more than 1,000 in an attack that the four said was to avenge U.S. support for Israel and to protest U.S. Middle East policy.
* In June 1993, U.S. warships fired 24 cruise missiles at Baghdad's intelligence headquarters to retaliate for what the administration called an Iraqi plot to assassinate former President George Bush.
But some cases remain unsolved.
* Two Libyan suspects in the 1988 bombing of Pan Am Flight 103, which killed 270 people, have not yet gone to trial. Despite six years of sanctions, Libyan leader Moammar Gadhafi has refused to hand over the two intelligence agents, saying he wants a trial in a neutral country.
* Likewise, nobody has been held to account for the 1983 bombing of the U.S. Marine barracks in Beirut, Lebanon, a suicide attack that killed 241 Americans.
Retired Army Gen. Wayne Downing, former head of the U.S. Special Operations Command who studied the Khobar bombing, said retaliation against terrorists can be difficult. Many, such as bin Laden, are considered part of transnational groups that oppose U.S. interests around the globe and represent no specific government.
''We can retaliate against a state,'' Downing said, ''but to retaliate against a transnational is much more difficult.''
One problem, he said, is that the U.S. system frowns upon undercover tactics to get terrorists.
''We have saddled our intelligence community with some very onerous restraints,'' Downing said. ''But when dealing with terrorists, we have to remember that we are not dealing with very nice people.''
THE EMBASSY BOMBINGS

Graphic

 
PHOTO, PHOTO: Dave Caulkin/Associated Press: The U.S. Embassy in Nairobi,; left, is pictured with blasted ruins next to it yesterday.

Load-Date: August 10, 1998


End of Document