Unconventional terrorism deserves greater attention

The Pantagraph (Bloomington, IL)
February 1, 1999, Monday


Copyright 1999 The Pantagraph
Section: Editorial; Pg. A8
Length: 372 words
Body


President Clinton is right about the need for the United States to be prepared for attacks against computer networks and terrorist use of chemical or biological weapons.
Whether the $2.8 billion he proposes for this initiative is the right figure is another matter.
The Clinton proposal calls for doubling spending over the next two years to address chemical and biological risks and a 40% increase in spending to protect computers from "cyber attack."
If too much money is pumped into this area at once, there is an increased risk it will be frittered away on ineffective, inappropriate measures.
Much of the U.S. effort against terrorism has been focused on conventional forms of attack, such as bombing.
An increasing number of public buildings are equipped with metal detectors and more airports and other sensitive areas are using explosives-detecting equipment. Steps also have been taken to make buildings less accessible to car/truck bombs by erecting barriers, closing roads and placing buildings farther from streets.
But comparatively little has been done to guard against chemical/biological attacks, and protection of the nation's vast computer networks is in its infancy.
Perhaps it is because we have seen the destruction caused by bombings - the World Trade Center, Oklahoma City, the TWA flight over Lockerbie, Scotland - while the threat of unconventional terrorism has yet to be fully realized.
The nerve gas attack in a Tokyo subway four years ago should have been enough to shock us out of complacency. We shouldn't wait for such an attack on U.S. soil or against U.S. citizens to spur greater action.
The major categories in which Clinton proposes spending money make sense: stockpiling medicines and vaccines for civilians; training and equipping emergency personnel; developing protection for the nation's infrastructure, such as communications and power networks.
The government should set priorities where the risk and potential for harm are greatest.
It is better to boost efforts where the threat is most realistic - such as a Tokyo-style nerve gas attack - than to devote resources to remote possibilities with expensive, technologically questionable responses - such as a long-range nuclear missile attack by Iraq.

Load-Date: February 19, 1999


End of Document