Understanding Islamic Terrorism
New York Sun (Archive)
July 2, 2004 Friday


Copyright 2004 The New York Sun, Two SL, LLC All Rights Reserved
Section: KNICKERBOCKER; Pg. 17
Length: 819 words
Byline: G ARYSHAPIRO
Body


ARTHUR'S AWARD The annual Arthur Ross Book Award recognizes books that contribute to the understanding of foreign policy or international relations. Endowed by philanthropist Arthur Ross in 2001, the prize is awarded for nonfiction works, including biography.
Center for Strategic and International Studies senior fellow Daniel Benjamin and Rand Corporation senior analyst Steven Simon won the gold medal and a $10,000 first prize for their book "The Age of Sacred Terror: Radical Islam's War Against America" (Random House).
"The Age of Sacred Terror" analyzes the growth of radical Islam from its medieval origins to the present.
The 2003-04 jury included Harvard University Kennedy School professor Stephen Walt; Carnegie Endowment for International Peace senior associates
Rose Gottemoeller and Robert Kagan; Foreign Affairs editor James Hoge Jr.; Harvard professor Stanley Hoffmann; William Heinemann editorial director Joy de Menil; Brookings Institution senior fellow S. Lael Brainard; the vice chairman of United Nations Association of the U.S.A., Arthur Ross; and Janklow & Nesbit senior partner Morton Janklow.
Gary Hart, the former Democratic Senator from Colorado, who is now a senior counsel at Coudert Brothers, moderated a discussion with the two winning authors. Mr. Hart said that their common bond was their back ground in the study of religion.The audience laughed when Mr. Hart said all three also had the words "senior" in their titles, but the question remained, he said, why is he the only one with gray hair.
Mr. Hart said that the "war on terrorism" could be likened to declaring a "war on blitzkrieg" in 1941, since terrorism is a method rather than a concrete enemy. It seems at first instance, Mr. Hart said, that America was "at war with an ideology." Mr. Benjamin responded that radical Islam was a "global insurgency" engaged in an "extraordinary act of appropriation" of
various ideas useful to their cause.
Mr. Simon said that radical Islam saw the West as threatening its "identity" and "integrity of self" and was engaged in a struggle that its adherents saw as "not going their way."
Mr. Hart asked if America was safer today than the country was in March of last year. Mr. Benjamin replied that he feared over the long term "we're losing ground." Mr. Hart then probed further, asking if in the future Iraq will become "a beacon of democracy or a cesspool of civil war."
Mr. Hart noted that "The
Age of Sacred Terror" indicts the press and the FBI in its discussion of September 11. In an aside, Mr. Hart said in deadpan, "I can't, for the life of me, understand how you could indict the press." Members of the audience chuckled, as Mr. Hart joked,"You're all too young to remember," referring to his own battle with the press over al leged marital infidelity.
Mr. Simon said he and his co-author identified flaws with the FBI, which had more a "culture of prosecution" rather than one of counterterrorism; the FBI, he said, expressed a general unwillingness to take seriously the severity of the threat.
Mr. Hart said, "Do you find it strange, as I do, that no one after 9/11 lost their job?" A discussion ensued as to accountability, or in Mr. Hart's words, "who messed up?" Mr. Simon said the "culture of secrecy" that was so dominant within the CIA was one culprit.
Mr. Hart inquired if the burden was on America to democratize the Arab world. Mr. Benjamin said democratization involved building the middle class and spreading the rule of law, not just providing one vote to each person.
An audience member asked if America is hated by radical Islamists for "who we are" or "what we do." Mr. Benjamin said a goal is to "cut the cord" between those who have hated us for who we are and those who, because of the Iraqi invasion, hate us for what we do.
In closing, Mr. Hart postulated what if, at some date in the future, Random House were putting together a fifth edi tion of their book. What, he asked, would the authors like to add to the volume? The audience laughed when Mr. Simon shrugged and said it was already "such a comprehensive work." Further merriment ensued when one of the authors suggested adding "an encomium to Arthur Ross."
***
PEN PALS The president and chief executive officer of Pilot Pen Corporation of America, Ron Shaw, saw A.L. Gordon's recent "Out and About" column in the New York Sun in which Mr. Clinton was quoted saying, "It's a Pilot, that's right" in response to the question what pen he would be using to sign copies of his memoir.
So, Mr. Shaw sent Mr. Clinton a case of "Dr. Grip," a pen with a "center of gravity" that is made specifically for people with arthritis. Mr. Shaw figured that with all the books Mr. Clinton would be signing, this pen might help prevent his hand from cramping up.
The case arrived in Chappaqua, where Secret Service agents opened it and proceeded to take out all the pens and carry them in their pockets to the former president.

Load-Date: July 2, 2004


End of Document