UNDERSTANDING YOUR WORLD: SETTLE IN FOR THE LONG HAUL
The Santa Fe New Mexican (New Mexico)
August 12, 2007 Sunday


Copyright 2007 The New Mexican
Section: NATION & WORLD; Pg. B-1
Length: 878 words
Byline: BILL STEWART
Body


Stewart: Political disputes in Middle East more likely to be settled at the clan level
In the wake of the Sept. 11, 2001, terrorist attacks, President George Bush declared we were in a war on terrorism. He still says so.
The president bamboozled a weak Congress and a frightened American public into granting him extraordinary powers to fight that war. He even led us into a miserable conflict in Iraq in pursuit of his goal.
But the Iraq war turned out not to be not so much against terrorism as against the regime of Saddam Hussein, said to be the nexus of all evil in the Middle East. Get rid of him, it was argued, and the manifold problems of the Middle East would soon resolve themselves. Wiser heads in the CIA and the State Department told him there wasn't much chance of that happening, but the president persisted, believing that's what the war on terrorism was all about.
But it wasn't, and it isn't. The war in Afghanistan was against terrorism, but the war in Iraq tore the country apart, descending into a bloody civil war in which coalition forces are still caught in the middle. The problems of withdrawal are such that we are going to be there for some years to come, regardless of who wins the presidency in 2008.
Let me be blunt. We are not engaged in a war on terrorism, as British Prime Minister Gordon Brown pointed out obliquely in his joint news conference with President Bush at Camp David. Instead, Brown described terrorism as a crime and should be treated as such. He studiously did not say we were engaged in a war but, rather, engaged in a long struggle, one that could last a generation or more.
Strictly speaking, war always implies armed conflict. Struggle implies a broader effort, in which armed conflict is not automatic but may at times be necessary. Brown's use of the word struggle is closer to the Arabic "jihad," which, according to Webster's Ninth New Collegiate Dictionary, could mean "a holy war waged on behalf of Islam as a religious duty," or "a crusade for a principle or belief." If we truly mean to struggle against terrorism, then we almost certainly mean a crusade for our principles and beliefs.
Sometimes that might mean armed conflict, but often it does not. We need to put our struggle into a broader historical context, using not only armed force when we are physically attacked, but the broader resources of the Western world, including economic assistance with an emphasis on health and education. Democracies aren't built overnight, and women's rights aren't going to win the day in the sands of the Middle East, or the deserts of Mali and Mauritania. Those come much later.
The length of time needed is daunting. One thing we need to gain is a greater historical perspective in order to deal with cultural values that are not our own but vitally affect the course of events in the Middle East and elsewhere.
We are only beginning to understand that countries like Iraq and Afghanistan may like the trappings of modern Western states -- such as parliaments and law courts -- but political disputes are more likely to be resolved at the level of family, clan and tribe. There may well be a number of political parties in the Iraqi parliament freely elected by the Iraqi people. But the violent disputes that are tearing the country apart are more likely to be settled at the clan and tribal level well away from the eyes of parliament.
These tribal and clan values, notes Michael Frachetti, an archaeologist with Washington University working in Central Asia, are rooted in the customs and institutions of nomadism, out of which present day Iraq and Afghanistan have grown. Speaking to The New York Times, Franchetti notes, "In and of itself you can't graft what happened two thousand years ago and say that's what it is today, but it helps to understand how these societies have found successful strategies and how they respond to outside forces."
In Iraq, U.S. forces are now arming Sunni tribal chiefs in al Anbar province, people who once fiercely fought American forces. By arming the tribal chiefs we are helping to ensure their traditional positions of power in Anbar, thereby gaining their loyalty for the duration of the fighting. They may not like us or respect our values. But they now know that we understand a vital element of how their world works. It is a policy bitterly criticized by Shiite politicians in Baghdad for precisely that reason. Arming Sunni tribal chiefs is a temporary expedient, but it is one based upon a more intimate knowledge of how Iraq actually works. This is not the best of all worlds, but given the previous situation in al Anbar, it is a welcome improvement. It is based upon a far more intimate knowledge of Iraq and Iraqis than American forces had at the beginning of the war.
This is precisely the kind of knowledge, gained through painful experience, that we need to acquire if our struggle against terrorism is to succeed. It may not be elevating, or celebrated in college text books on ethics. But it is essential. It's all about learning how lands far from our shores actually work. Patience and diligence succeed. Shock and awe didn't.
Bill Stewart, a former U.S. Foreign Service officer and Time magazine correspondent, lives in Santa Fe. He writes weekly on foreign affairs.

Load-Date: August 19, 2007


End of Document