Underwriters adjust to Persian Gulf War;
Cargo rates fall, other costs rise
Business Insurance
January 28, 1991


Copyright 1991 Crain Communications, Inc.
Section: WAR IN THE GULF; Pg. 1
Length: 1925 words
Byline: By STACY SHAPIRO and GAVIN SOUTER
Dateline: LONDON
Body


Some war risk insurance rates in the Middle East are falling as the Persian Gulf War escalates, though the war is forcing insurance prices up for many policyholders.
London's cargo war risk rating committee last week reduced rates for goods headed by air or sea to various spots in the Persian Gulf, Red Sea and Mediterranean Sea after concluding the threats were not as great as first imagined.
Quoted rates fell up to 80% from Jan. 21 to Jan. 23.
However, as the threat to Turkey and Egypt escalated last week, marine hull war risk underwriters decided last week to remove them from the list of countries for which only the standard annual rate of 0.0275% of insured value is charged.  Owners of ships bound for these ports will face additional premiums beginning Feb. 1.
Meanwhile, marine underwriters are demanding additional premium for terrorism coverage for onshore and offshore oil and gas facilities, while aviation war risk underwriters threatened to increase rates for war risk and terrorism coverage worldwide.
And underwriters last week were still deciding how to replace coverage for airlines, shipowners and other policyholders if a nuclear attack triggers the automatic termination clause in most policies that cover war risks, terrorism, strikes and civil commotion.
"Rates go up and down," said Richard Hilliard, managing director of the marine division at Leslie & Godwin Ltd., a London brokerage.
Underwriters and brokers rushed around the London market last week as rates to the Middle East changed every 24 to 48 hours.
However, some semblance of order seemed to be settling in last week as the players started developing routines to cope with the volume of rate and policy term changes triggered by the fighting.
For example, the joint Lloyd's of London and Institute of London Underwriters cargo war risk rating committee cut some rates for ship and air cargo to the Middle East on both Wednesday and Friday.
The committee now changes rates at least every 48 hours.
Among the location for which cargo war risk rates were cut last week were:
* Persian Gulf ports south of 27 degrees 30 minutes north latitude and west of 52 degrees east longitude.  The rate was cut to 2% of insured value from 3.5%.
* The ports of Qatar and Bahrain.  The rate also was cut to 2% of insured value from 3.5%.
* Saudi Arabian Red Sea ports, including Jeddah.  The rate was cut to 0.25% of insured value from 0.5%.
* Ports in Jordan.  The rate was cut on Friday to 0.375% of insured value from 0.5%.
Cargo coverage was also available for goods being shipped to Jubail, Saudi Arabia, at an unofficial rate of 5% for a 48-hour voyage, despite Iraqi missile attacks in the area.
In addition, cargo war risk rates for Israeli Mediterranean ports were cut to 0.75% of insured value on Wednesday and to 0.5% on Friday from the previous 2.5%.  Rates for Israeli Red Sea ports were cut to 0.5% of insured value on Wednesday and to 0.375% on Friday from 2.5%.
Reductions in Israeli war risk cargo rates followed a decision by the Israeli Knesset's finance committee to offer both marine hull and cargo war risk coverage to encourage shipping to Israeli ports, confirmed Nathan Myer, the Israeli economic minister.
That government coverage is available only if commercial rates exceed 0.375% of insured value, he said.
Israel offered to sell the coverage after it was outraged that London war risk underwriters had increased marine hull and cargo war risk rates of 2.5% of insured value.
During the Yom Kippur War of 1973, their maximum rate had been only 0.75%, said Mr. Myer.  "There's no risk in the Mediterranean" from Iraqi Scud missile attacks or from mines, he said.
The Israeli government's offer of marine hull and cargo war risk coverage follows its offer of war risk insurance for flights in and out of Israeli airports in early January, he said.
By law, the Israeli government also will pay to repair property damage from Iraq's Scud missile attacks and will offer to compensate victims of the attacks, he said.
Meanwhile, air cargo war risk rates increased last week for flights in all areas outside the Middle east.
The war risks rating committee said Friday that the worldwide rate for war risk and terrorism coverage increased to 0.0275% from 0.02% of the insured value of the cargo.  For war risk coverage only, rates doubled to 0.025%.
Marine hull war risk rates in London remained static last week for voyages to the Persian Gulf and the Middle East, said Mr. Hilliard of Leslie & Godwin.
"Since the weekend (of Jan. 19-20), they have stayed where they are.  For example, for a vessel visiting Jubail (in Saudi Arabia), the rate is still around 3% for seven days' coverage," with the quote valid for 24 hours, said Tony Forst, managing director of Citicorp Insurance Brokers Marine Ltd.  "And for vessels trading in the Red Sea at Jeddah, the rate is still around 0.3% for seven days' cover, valid for 24 hours."
But the hull war risk market remains extremely uncertain, he noted.  "The question is, what are the Iraqis going to do next?  Will they strike, and what will Saddam Hussein do?"
Leading Lloyd's marine war risk underwriter Chris Rome said early last week that hull war risk rates in the Gulf varied between 3.5% and 5% of insured value for areas south of the most dangerous region in the northwest part of the Gulf.
He believes that mines are the main threat to Gulf shipping.  "It is absolutely inevitable that ships will be blown up by mines," said Mr. Rome, recalling that many commercial ships were damaged by mines during the Iran-Iraq war.
While marine hull war risk rates remained basically stagnant, underwriters last week said they would charge additional war risk premiums for voyages to ports in Egypt and Turkey, confirmed Mr. Hilliard.
Underwriters, including Mr. Rome, also are concerned about terrorist attacks on targets like oil installations and utility plants.
"I have had a lot of inquiries from oil companies that have not previously covered the risk of terrorism," he said.
Lloyd's underwriters are not allowed to insure land-based installations, including stationary offshore oil and gas platforms, for war risks under the Waterbourne Agreement (BI, Jan. 14).  However, oil companies can buy additional coverage in the all-risk coverage for "strikes and civil commotion," which includes coverage for damage to offshore and onshore installations by terrorist attack, he said.
Mr. Rome said that he has given all oil companies for which he writes coverage notice that he will cancel their terrorism coverage within 14 days -- or by Jan. 31 -- so that he can rewrite the terrorism coverage and "increase the rate." He would not say how much the rates would be increased.
"There has been a general movement among underwriters here and abroad to give notice of cancellation on a worldwide basis for terrorist cover for fixed and movable rigs," added Philip Hallett, executive director in the energy department at C. T. Bowring & Co. Ltd.
However, he added that it is unclear what underwriters will regard as a terrorist attack and what will be regarded as an act of war.
"For example, what happens if a Palestinian terrorist blows up a rig in the North Sea because he is told to by Saddam Hussein?" he asked.  Underwriters will reinstate terrorist coverage, "but they will not say whether they will cover this," he said.
"At the moment there are huddles of people all around London trying to come to an agreement to act in unison over this," said Mr. Hallett.
He said the highest quote for terrorism coverage he had heard was 0.25% of insured value per annum for 30 days' cover.  Terrorism coverage for fixed platforms in the North Sea last week cost between 0.075% to 0.175% of insured value, while coverage for floating rigs in the North Sea cost 0.1%, he said.
Meanwhile, aviation hull and liability war risk rates for flights in the Middle East remained high, and war risk underwriters still were threatening to increase the premiums that airlines worldwide pay for war risk and terrorism coverage.
For flights to the Middle East, airlines still are paying additional hull and liability war risk premiums on a per-flight basis ranging from 0.075% of the insured value to 2.5%.
And aviation liability underwriters -- who write liability war risk coverage as an addendum to airlines' all-risk hull and liability insurance -- also have been charging phenomenal premiums for war risk cover.
From Jan. 22-24, airlines flying to Saudi Arabia, Syria, Jordan, Bahrain, Qatar and Israel were being charged as much as $ 100 per passenger per flight for liability war risk coverage, said one aviation underwriter.  During the same period, airlines flying to Turkey, Cyprus, the United Arab Emirates, Egypt, Lebanon, Oman, Yemen and Iran were being charged $ 30 per passenger per flight, he said.
In addition, aviation market sources said last week that aviation hull and liability underwriters still were considering increasing the standard war risk premiums for airlines worldwide.
Aviation hull war risk premium rates for worldwide coverage outside the hot spots has been steadily increasing over the past year, brokers say.  Because of the Gulf crisis, however, airlines will probably face rate hikes of 50% to 100% when they renew their hull war risk coverage, said one broker.
"I would visualize substantial aupward rating . . . for all airlines targeted" by Iraqi sympathizers, leading aviation hull war risk underwriter Barnabas Hurst-Bannister said early last week.
In addition, aviation all-risk liability underwriters met on Jan. 19 to discuss whether to increase the cost of war risk coverage, which covers terrorist attacks, according to market sources.
At the moment, airlines are charged a rate of 10% of their all-risk liability premium for worldwide liability war risk coverage.  No one would speculate by how much this surcharge will rise, but "I wouldn't be surprised if the terrorist surcharge increased," said Chris Keville, chairman of Bowring Aviation Ltd.
Meanwhile, brokers and underwriters moved closer to controlling the problems that could arise if the use of nuclear weapons triggers the cancellation of war risk and terrorism coverages worldwide.  Policies that contain clauses covering war, strikes and civil commotion, including malicious damage due to terrorist attacks, are automatically terminated if war breaks out between two of the five major world powers or if nuclear weapons are used.
The automatic termination clause was designed to protect underwriters against massive losses during the Cold War when it was feared that a nuclear attack by the United States or Soviet Union would trigger a world holocaust, sources agree.
"It was never envisaged that you'd get a highly localized nuclear war," said Mr. Hilliard.
As a result, many marine and aviation hull war risk underwriters have agreed to participate in facilities set up by brokers that will provide up to $ 200 million in coverage if war risk policies are automatically terminated.
Leslie & Godwin, for example, has established a facility to provide up to $ 100 million in marine hull war risk coverage following a nuclear attack.
However, the replacement "coverage is not automatic," said Mr. Hilliard.  "You must get out of your pajamas and get dressed and go to the underwriter to get your whole book of business reinstated."
The London Insurance Brokers' Committee is working with aviation underwriters to come up with a uniform wording that would reinstate liability war risk coverage after a nuclear detonation, said Mr. Keville, chairman of LIBC's aviation committee.


End of Document