Unfriendly Skies for Libya
The New York Times
January 25, 1992, Saturday, Late Edition - Final


Copyright 1992 The New York Times Company
Distribution: Editorial Desk
Section: Section 1;; Section 1; Page 22; Column 1; Editorial Desk; Column 1;; Editorial
Length: 352 words
Body


For too long, terrorism in the air has been a crime without punishment for outlaw states that shelter wanted suspects. This week, for the first time, the United Nations held Libya directly accountable for its involvement in "deeply disturbing" terrorist acts. It is a salutary precedent that can hasten the end of a dirty business.
A unanimous Security Council has ordered Libya to surrender for trial two agents accused of planting the bomb that blew up Pan American Flight 103 over Lockerbie, Scotland, in 1988. If Col. Muammar al-Qaddafi refuses to comply, he risks a painful follow-up: the severing of international air links to Libya and a U.N. embargo on sales of aircraft and spare parts.
Meticulous British and American police work tracked the Lockerbie bomb from Malta to its transfer to Flight 103 in Frankfurt. The two Libyans have been indicted as conspirators in the deaths of its 270 victims. And France holds Libya responsible for 171 deaths in a 1989 midair explosion over Niger of a French-operated airliner.
Libya dismisses charges against its agents as "guesswork" and promises a trial in Libya if the British and Americans hand over the evidence. The notion that Colonel Qaddafi would permit the conviction of his own agents defies belief. Given his past lawlessness, the Security Council is right to make an example of Libya. Its action also opens the way for dealing collectively with Libya's buildup of chemical weapons.
The United Nations is venturing onto fresh terrain. Over the years, Western democracies have threatened but never imposed sanctions called for in civil aviation treaties to penalize states that sponsor or shelter terrorists. A practical consideration has discouraged enforcement, which is that even if Western carriers severed lucrative air routes, Soviet bloc airlines were unlikely to join in the boycott.
The world has changed, and so has the Security Council consensus. The showdown with Libya is wholly consistent with the aims of aviation treaties and innumerable declarations condemning terrorism. The difference is that this time U.N. sheriffs have put out a warrant.

Load-Date: January 25, 1992


End of Document