Uninformed opinions spawn hatred
University Wire
March 10, 2006 Friday


Copyright 2006 The Tiger via U-Wire
Section: COLUMN
Length: 677 words
Byline: By Kelly Harless, The Tiger; SOURCE: Clemson U.
Dateline: CLEMSON, S.C. 
Body


I have been a tour guide for Clemson for two years now, and as a part of my usual routine, I stop in front of Brackett Hall where I suggest that members of my tour group pick up copies of the student newspapers. Typically, the students enjoy the Time Out section while the parents are more impressed with the news articles. However, this time, rather than providing these prospective students with a view into Clemson life, they were confronted with the image of a bloody and misquoted Qu'ran on the front page of The Tiger Town Observer, whose stand unfortunately is beside that of The Tiger. To say that some members of the group may have been offended is an understatement. Thankfully, that image alone prevented them from picking up a copy, and I can't be more thankful that they didn't read the hate-filled and racist articles that lie within the pages. This publication was embarrassing and hurtful to me as a Clemson student and more so to the University itself. Just think of the image these prospective students must have of Clemson University and its ideals.
While I feel that the reprinting of the cartoons depicting Mohammad was in very poor taste and completely disrespectful toward the Muslim students and faculty who contribute to this University and the Clemson Family as a whole, I respect the newspaper's right to free speech. However, if the objective was to make the student body more knowledgeable, suggesting a simple Google image search would have been just as effective and much more considerate. Additionally, claiming not to be a racist does not excuse referring to an entire group of people as "vicious animals," completely and incorrectly debasing one of the largest religions in the world, and falsely quoting their most sacred text. It is almost laughable to claim to have political beliefs based on morals and honor when one's actions clearly indicate otherwise.
As mean-spirited and intolerant as recent articles may have been, their excessive amount of ignorance does prove a very good point, making them a prime example of a widespread attitude that needs to be addressed. The United States is embroiled in a war on terror; this we all know. However, the distinction between terrorism and Islam has become very hazy in the minds of many Americans. Islam is actually a very peaceful religion; taking the time to investigate its principles and beliefs makes this very clear. However, just as in any religion, there are radical groups that take certain scriptures and passages to the extreme, hence al-Qaeda and other terrorist groups on which the media tends to focus. This is not just an Islamic trend; just ask your favorite Klansman, and I am sure that he would tell you with pride that he is doing God's work. Not all terrorism is carried out by Arabs, nor is all terrorism conducted in the name of Allah, a misconception that seems to be running rampant across the U.S. based on the recent United Arab Emirates port controversy. The Oklahoma City bombings were not carried out by two men of Muslim faith, but rather by a couple of white guys with a vendetta against our government. The Unabomber attacked under the guise of leftist, anti-corporate activism. Are now all white males suspect?
I draw on these examples as a reminder that terrorism arises in many forms and is executed by various groups, each with their own agenda. As intelligent college students and citizens, our responsibility is to separate the good from the bad, recognizing that the violence of a few is not representative of the whole. Before buying into the hate, bigotry, and ignorance that the Observer seems to be intentionally breeding, take the time to educate yourself. Become knowledgeable on and research the major topics at hand. Show compassion and consideration for your fellow students and prove to the community and the nation that we are in fact a university that embraces and encourages different perspectives and beliefs, not just a bunch of close-minded southerners who condemn that which we do not understand.
(C) 2006 The Tiger via U-WIRE

Load-Date: March 10, 2006


End of Document