United States Lifts Syria Travel Advisory, Continuing a Strategic Thaw
The New York Times
February 21, 2010 Sunday
Late Edition - Final


Copyright 2010 The New York Times Company
Section: Section A; Column 0; Foreign Desk; Pg. 13
Length: 349 words
Byline: By THE ASSOCIATED PRESS
Dateline: DAMASCUS, Syria 
Body


The United States has lifted an advisory that warned American travelers about security concerns in Syria, officials said Saturday, as Washington tries to thaw relations with the Syrians, who are seen as crucial to peace in the region.
  Syria's foreign minister, Walid al-Moallem, welcomed the decision and said ''both sides will start taking practical steps'' to improve relations.
  ''We are willing to see a real development in these relations, and from our side we will do what we have to,'' Mr. Moallem said. He did not specify what  steps Syria would take.
  Syria remains on a United States list of countries supporting terrorism, a designation made in 1979 because of suspicions that Syria collaborates with Iran to supply munitions to radical Islamist groups. 
  Syria also remains under American sanctions, which President Obama renewed in May. First imposed by President George W. Bush, the sanctions cite Syrian support for terrorism, its pursuit of unconventional weapons and other activities, including efforts to undermine American operations in Iraq.
  Last week, the International Atomic Energy Agency said that uranium particles found at a Syrian complex bombed three years ago by Israel suggested the existence of possible covert nuclear activity there. That view added weight to Western concerns that the site was a nearly finished reactor with the ability to make weapons-grade plutonium.
  Still, the United States has continued to try to improve relations with Syria, as tensions with Iran rise. The first major move came in June, when the United States said it would restore an American ambassador to Syria after about five years without one.
  A State Department spokesman, P. J. Crowley, said the United States remained concerned about Syria's nuclear activity but stood by a decision to restore the diplomatic mission in Syria. 
  ''We are going to have an ambassador there who will engage Syria on the full range of issues, those areas where we think there's opportunity for cooperation and those areas where we have concerns about Syria's ongoing activity,'' he said Friday.

http://www.nytimes.com

Load-Date: February 21, 2010


End of Document