United Congress frays a bit Partisanship begins to show after initial wave of terrorism
Charleston Daily Mail (West Virginia)
October 20, 2001, Saturday


Copyright 2001 Charleston Newspapers
Section: News; Pg. P1A
Length: 634 words
Byline: KARIN FISCHER
Body


DAILY MAIL WASHINGTON BUREAU
WASHINGTON - For a time after the terrorist attacks, members of Congress did what many would consider unthinkable. They got along.
Relief funding and legislation to allow the use of force sped through both houses with barely a no vote. Republican and Democratic leaders held joint press conferences and co-sponsored bills. During a prime time presidential speech, Democrats were on their feet to cheer President Bush; as soon as he finished, Bush immediately hugged the Senate Democratic leader.
But in the past week, the comity has frayed, revealing partisanship lurking underneath. While no one is eager to call cooperation dead, it is certainly ailing.
The House is refusing to take up a Senate bill that federalizes 28,000 airport screeners. "It's ridiculous," House Transportation Chairman Don Young, R-Alaska, said of the Senate bill, which passed that chamber a week ago, 100-0. The House introduced its own version on Wednesday.
"It's philosophical and ideological," said Senate Aviation Chairman Jay Rockefeller, D-W.Va., of House Republican opposition.
House Democrats are frustrated with Republicans over aviation security, anti-terrorism legislation and a stimulus package that is all tax cuts and no spending increases. House rules allow the majority Republicans to control the debate, leading Democrats to literally shout out their concerns. "We are running out of patience," hollered Democratic Whip David Bonior, D-Mich, during a recent debate.
Rep. Alan Mollohan, D-W.Va., said he is experiencing a sense of deja vu, comparing the current economic stimulus proposals to a $ 3 trillion tax cut passed earlier this year. "This is not a stimulus to the economy. It is a reward to a political group that supported the president," he said.
And Senate Republicans have been blocking a Foreign Operations spending bill from coming to the floor, saying they want votes on federal judges first.
Senate Majority Leader Tom Daschle, D-S.D., said there are billions of dollars in assistance to Afghan refugees, to fight infectious diseases and to support key American military allies in the fight against terrorism that "are not being provided as a result of the intransigence of some of our colleagues on the other side."
Republicans said Daschle and the Democrats were the intransigent ones. Almost all 100 judicial vacancies remain unfilled. "We're way behind," said Sen. Don Nickles, R-Okla.
Senate Appropriations Chairman Robert Byrd, D-W.Va., was disturbed that the spending bills crafted by his committee were being stalled. "It's preposterous that we're going at less than a snail's pace," he said.
Still, lawmakers said they continue to be optimistic that Washington won't descend into the partisanship and rancor that marked the first eight months of the congressional session and Bush's presidency. That belief will be put to the test when lawmakers return to Washington Tuesday after a mandatory shutdown for environmental testing after anthrax was discovered in Daschle's office. A fraternal rivalry, sometimes just as sticky as a partisan one, erupted when the House decided to shut down as the Senate vowed to stay in business.
"I think there is overall unity" to fight against terrorism, Rockefeller said. "I focus on that."
Rep. Shelley Moore Capito, R-W.Va., said despite recent differences, lawmakers remain united. "Disagreement is not a bad thing, but I don't think you have to disagree just to disagree. That happened before, sadly."
Daschle appeared to agree. Speaking to reporters recently, he said, "We're seeing Democrats and Republicans being Democrats and Republicans....I just hope we can avoid the temptation to be strident Democrats and strident Republicans."
Writer Karin Fischer can be reached at (202) 662-8732 or by e-mail at kfischer@dailymail.com.  

Load-Date: October 24, 2001


End of Document