UNITED NATIONS REFORM AWAITING POLITICAL WILL
The New York Times
September 28, 1984, Friday, Late City Final Edition


Copyright 1984 The New York Times Company
Section: Section A; Page 30, Column 4; Editorial Desk; letter
Length: 290 words
Body


To the Editor:
Congratulations to Flora Lewis on her column ''A U.N. Charter Review'' (Sept. 21). As U Thant said in 1972, ''The ultimate crisis before the United Nations is a crisis of authority, and nations unfortunately are reluctant to give the United Nations the authority it needs to resolve global problems.''
A Charter Review Conference could perhaps tackle the sticky questions inherent in the General Assembly's inequitable voting system and the continued abuse of the veto power by the major powers. One trade-off would be a weighted system of voting in the General Assembly in return for a modification of the veto. Another would be a weighted voting system in return for giving General Assembly decisions more meaning, e.g., making them ''binding'' rather than mere recommendations.
But a lot more can be done to reform the U.N. system without Charter amendment, such as establishment of a U.N. Mediation and Conciliation Service, a U.N. Peacekeeping Reserve and an International Arms Control Verification Agency with on-site inspection authority. Or a U.N. High Commissioner for Human Rights, greater use of the advisory opinion jurisdiction of the World Court and an International Criminal Court to try people accused of crimes against diplomats, aerial hijacking and other forms of international terrorism.
The real problem, as U Thant noted, is political will. Washington and Moscow often stand together against change. Only a few small countries are for real reform. It is time we at least changed the U.S. perspective toward reform. Then, with patience and persistence, we might make some progress toward achieving a more effective U.N.
 
WALTER HOFFMANN Executive Vice President Campaign for U.N. Reform Wayne, N.J., Sept. 21, 1984


End of Document