UNIVERSITY RETURNS $600,000 LIBYAN GIFT
The New York Times
February 24, 1981, Tuesday, Late City Final Edition


Copyright 1981 The New York Times Company
Section: Section A; Page 13, Column 1; National Desk
Length: 637 words
Byline: By GENE I. MAEROFF
Body


Georgetown University in Washington yesterday returned to the Government of Libya more than $600,000 of a gift it had received to endow a professorship in its Center for Contemporary Arab Studies.
''Libya's continued accent on violence as a normal method of international policy and its growing support of terrorism as a tool of government has made it increasingly impossible for Georgetown University to feel comfortable in having its name associated with the Libyan Government,'' said the Rev. Timothy S. Healy, the university's president.
The gift, which was donated in annual increments of $150,000 beginning in 1977, was known to be a source of continuing unease to Father Healy, who became president of Georgetown shortly after the gift had been solicited and found himself frequently having to defend the university's relationship with Libya. A final installment, raising the total to $750,000, was due this year.
Georgetown University returns gift funds to Libyan Government
Instead, Georgetown's trustees decided last Friday to sever the tie, and at noon yesterday Father Healy delivered a check for $641,721, including interest, to the Libyan Embassy. A spokesman for the embassy said later in the day that his Government had no comment.
 
Post to Be Continued
Georgetown said that it would continue to support the Umar alMukhtar Chair, now held by Prof. Hisham Sharabi, from its own resources. The professorship will still carry the name of the Libyan nationalist who died 60 years ago fighting the Italians.
The gift from Libya was one of several that Georgetown had received from Arab governments in recent years. The university has been a leader among a growing number of American institutions of higher education seeking support from oil-rich Middle Eastern countries. The trend has been drawn some expressions of alarm about possible influence on academic policies.
In 1978, amid the controversy, Georgetown gave back without comment a $50,000 gift from Iraq, presumably because of extreme positions taken by that country.
However, Georgetown has retained, without apparent controversy, various donations totaling about $3.5 million from such other Middle Eastern countries as Kuwait, the United Arab Emirates, Oman, Egypt, Jordan, Qatar and Saudi Arabia.
 
Texas and Michigan Gifts
Both the University of Texas and the University of Michigan have accepted money from Libya, though spokesmen for the institutions said that neither currently had a financial link to Libya.
Texas had a three-year grant of $131,369 from Libya that expired last year. It supported programs in its Center for Middle Eastern Studies. Michigan got a grant from Libya estimated at $90,000 for summer institutes in 1978 and 1979.
An official of the American Jewish Committee, which has closely monitored gifts by Arab governments to colleges and universities in the United States, was happy to learn of Georgetown's decision on the gift from Libya, which the organization does not consider a proper partner for an American institution of higher education.
''Isn't that terrific,'' Ira Silverman, director of special programs for the American Jewish Committee, said of yesterday's action. ''It is a confirmation of our faith in the integrity of Georgetown as a university even though we were critical of their receiving that particular grant. Only the Libyan grant struck us as offensive inasmuch as Colonel el-Qaddafi,'' he said, referring to the Libyan leader, Col. Muammar el-Qaddafi, ''was the underwriter of the grant as well as of international terrorism.''
 
Financing in Second Place
In a letter sent yesterday to the members of the Georgetown faculty, Father Healy said, ''University finance must take second place to keeping a Catholic moral understanding without which Georgetown University, no matter how well endowed, would be meaningless.''


End of Document