University of Illinois experts address terrorism; 'Key player': State's new homeland security chief praises the school's role
Telegraph Herald (Dubuque, IA)
October 22, 2001 Monday


Copyright 2001 Woodward Communications, Inc.
Section: Pg. a5
Length: 427 words
Byline: ASSOCIATED PRESS
Dateline: SPRINGFIELD
Body


Illinois' new homeland security coordinator said experts at the University of Illinois have become valuable resources as the state develops an anti- terrorism plan.
Newly appointed coordinator Matt Bettenhausen, a U of I graduate, called the school a "key player" in the state's efforts, and added that the university's Fire Services Institute would be particularly important.
The institute recently ran the first statewide structural collapse rescue course. It also has been a training ground for "first responders," emergency personnel who are typically the first to arrive on the scene.
"We're training first responders to deal with the aftermath, the consequences of terrorism, as well as working with all the other agencies to develop plans and protocol to prevent and, if possible, pre-empt terrorism," said Richard Jaehne, director of the institute.
The institute already has trained about 19,000 first responders and will continue to do so in conjunction with task-force agencies including the Illinois Emergency Management Agency, state police, the state fire marshal, the departments of military affairs and Public Health, and the Environmental Protection Agency.
Other university experts also are doing their part.
Psychology professor Art Kramer is working on a project for the Federal Aviation Administration involving airport baggage inspectors.
"We're working on how people do their jobs and how we can enhance the training that they get to detect weapons," Kramer said. "We are investigating methods to enhance the number of guns, knives and bombs detected as they pass through the scanner."
Kramer had already started the project in August, but after the Sept. 11 terrorist attacks, the FAA contacted his office about speeding up their timetable, he said.
Meanwhile, researchers at the Construction Engineering Research Laboratory, in conjunction with the U.S. Army Corps of Engineers, are studying a number of anti-terrorism measures, including ways to protect heating, ventilation, and air conditioning systems against chemical attack, said CERL public affairs officer Dana Finney.
In the College of Engineering, professors are working on devices that could be used to detect biological threats. Experts are also developing an electronic nose that can "smell" and detect very small amounts of chemicals, said Sara Chilton, director of public relations for the college.
"We have to prepare for the worst," said state Rep. Rick Winkel, R-Champaign. "I would expect that the University of Illinois and the state will be working hand-in-hand to achieve that."

Load-Date: October 22, 2001


End of Document