Unless opposed,; terrorism works,; All have a stake in stopping the poisoning of civil societies
Charleston Daily Mail (West Virginia)
June 12, 2006, Monday


Copyright 2006 Charleston Newspapers
Section: EDITORIAL; Pg. P4A
Length: 390 words
Body


AHMAD Fadhil Nazzal al-Khalayleh, was born in Zarqa, Jordan on Oct. 20, 1966, one of 10 children from a branch of the Bani Hassan tribe.
He died on May 8, 2006, having taken the name of Abu Musab al-Zarqawi and earning the nickname, "the slaughtering sheik."
Jordanian security officials have said that as a teenager, this mass murderer was a thug - drinking, getting involved in street fights, serving a six-month sentence for raping a girl. He first went to Afghanistan in the 1980s, returned to Jordan, and was arrested in the mid-1990s.
After release from a Jordanian prison, he returned to Afghanistan in 1999 and linked up with Osama bin Laden, fleeing that country when the United States went after the Taliban in late 2001.
He fled to Iraq to Talibanize the Iraqi people.
The list of his crimes against humanity is endless. Jordan sentenced him to death in absentia for the October 2002 slaying of U.S. diplomat Laurence Foley.
His group targeted the United Nations' headquarters in Iraq in 2003, killing 22 people, including the United Nations' top official in Iraq, Sergio Vieira de Mello.
The United Nations capitulated and left Iraq.
His group massacred Shiites by the thousands.
He is believed to have personally beheaded at least two American hostages, Nicholas Berg and Eugene Armstrong. Al-Qaida also claimed bloody credit for killing American Jack Hensley, British engineer Kenneth Bidley, Kim Sun-il of South Korea and Shosei Koda of Japan.
His group blew up American troops and Iraqi security forces; assassinated the president of the Iraqi Governing Council, Izzadine Saleem; and assassinated Arab diplomats to deter Arab support for a democratic Iraq.
Zarqawi operations at hotels in Amman, Jordan, killed Sunnis by the dozens. When some Sunni leaders began working with Iraq's provisional government, al Qaida assassinated key leaders.
In Baquba, where he had settled into the safe house in which he was killed, his group was believed responsible for hijacking a bus full of students and slaughtering them, and of beheading nine people and leaving their heads in a box.
Societies that back off in the face of this savagery will live under its terms.
People who object to that fate must cooperate to stop it. This time, many did.
For the good of many very different societies, that is what it is going to take, time after time after time.

Load-Date: June 13, 2006


End of Document