Unlikely weapon: petanque balls help disarm Paris attacker
St. Louis Post-Dispatch (Missouri)
September 11, 2018 Tuesday
FINAL EDITION


Copyright 2018 St. Louis Post-Dispatch, Inc. All Rights Reserved
Section: NEWS; Pg. A15
Length: 415 words
Byline:  Associated Press   
Body


PARIS - They only went out to play a calm game of petanque and enjoy some warmth by a Parisian canal. By the end of the evening, the three friends had neutralized a knife-wielding attacker who had stabbed seven people, with an unlikely weapon: the game's clanking - and hefty - metal balls.
Lobbing them at the attacker and whacking him on the head with a wooden plank, they managed to bring the horror that befell Paris' 19th district on Sunday night to an end. The attacker is in custody, and police are trying to piece together what happened and what the attacker's motivations for his bloody rampage were.
Without the bravery of the three friends, and the normally slow-moving steel globes, it could have been a lot worse. The area, after all, was full of revelers from a popular cinema complex, tourists and families. Two British tourists were among those injured.
Luckily for everyone there, petanque player Boudjema Hamani and his two friends were on hand and ready to wield their own weapons of choice.
Petanque, a typically Gallic pastime played by some 20 million French in which a ball is slowly rolled along the gravelly ground, is ubiquitous in Parisian courtyards in summer months. It's popular with the elderly, and did not have a reputation associated with danger or speed - until now.
In a surprise response at 11 p.m., the friends - none of whom can be considered elderly - chased the attacker, who officials believe is Afghan, down the street and showered him with the steel spheres that can weigh about 2 pounds each. Some 30 were thrown at the attacker as he was trying to stab people with a 15-inch kitchen knife.
Hamani, who helped disarm and arrest the attacker, initially thought it was a normal commotion, perhaps a brawl.
"But some young girls and young boys ran toward us, telling us ‘careful, careful, he has a knife,'" Hamani told The Associated Press.
It was when the attacker arrived on the Bassin de la Villette canal that Hamani and his friends started throwing their uncommon projectiles at him, until he lost his balance and fellow petanque player Reda Smain hit him on the head with a wooden plank.
Smain then managed to wrest the knife away from the attacker, as his friends kept him on the ground until police arrived.
The petanque players were lauded for their bravery as French authorities opened a murder investigation into the attack.
Paris police said Monday four of the victims were in serious condition, including one who was in life-threatening condition.

Graphic

 
 Police secures the site of a knife attack in Paris, Monday, Sept. 10, 2018. A several people were injured in a knife attack in central Paris late Sunday but police said that terrorism was not suspected. (AP Photo/Thibault Camus)  Police officers work on the scene of a knife attack in Paris, Monday, Sept. 10, 2018. A several people were injured in a knife attack in central Paris late Sunday but police said that terrorism was not suspected. (AP Photo/Thibault Camus)  Police officers secure the site of a knife attack in Paris, Monday, Sept. 10, 2018. A several people were injured in a knife attack in central Paris late Sunday but police said that terrorism was not suspected. (AP Photo/Thibault Camus) 

Load-Date: September 13, 2018


End of Document