Unmask terrorism with hard evidence on Sudan bombing
The Pantagraph (Bloomington, IL)
September 4, 1998, Friday


Copyright 1998 The Pantagraph
Section: Editorial; Pg. A12
Length: 324 words
Body


Support for recent missile strikes against purported terrorist sites in Afghanistan and a chemical plant in Sudan was bipartisan and widespread - despite speculations about timing.
The evidence against Osama bin Laden's terrorist training camp in Afghanistan was as compelling as his own frequently repeated death threats to Americans everywhere - even though the suspected meeting of terrorist leaders, which supposedly triggered the attack, never materialized.
The demolition of the Shifa chemical plant in Sudan, however, is more ambiguous and open to multiple interpretations.
The Clinton administration says it has compelling evidence, in the form of soil samples, that the plant was being used to manufacture materials whose only known purpose is to produce deadly VX nerve gas.
The Sudanese government denies the charges and has proposed that an international mission come to collect soil samples of its own. Kuwait, an ally of the United States, has backed that proposal.
U.S. officials have dismissed that suggestion, while maintaining tight secrecy on whatever evidence they have. Even the rank and file members of Congress haven't been told of the evidence leading to the bombings, according to U.S. Rep. Ray LaHood, a Republican from Peoria. He told The Pantagraph Editorial Board this week that House and Senate members are to be briefed on the bombings when they return to session next week.
If the administration or the military cannot be more open about the incriminating evidence, they certainly should agree to have an international team of experts examine the Shifa site. The chemical agent in question, Empta, is long-lasting and should still be present at the plant site.
It is in the best interests of the United States to show how extensive international terrorism is and to bolster the claim the missile targets were carefully and wisely chosen.
Doing otherwise would undermine the credibility of America's war against terrorists.

Load-Date: September 4, 1998


End of Document