Unprincipled peace
Independent Collegian: University of Toledo 
February 15, 2010 Monday


University Wire
Copyright 2010 UWIRE via U-Wire All Rights Reserved
Section: OPINION; Pg. 1
Length: 796 words
Byline: Carmen Awad
Body


Watching the ferocious debates between the Democrats and the Republicans, I have come to the conclusion that they are far more similar than they may think - especially when it comes to foreign policy. Much like George W. Bush's administration, President Barack Obama's administration has focused too much of their time and effort on the "War on Terror." James Joyner, managing editor of the Atlantic Council, made a good point when he stated that "putting Bin Laden's head on a stick - or capturing him and subjecting him to the indignity of an international criminal tribunal - would be enormously satisfying but will have approximately zero impact on either stabilizing the region or combating international terrorism."
The problem with this endless debate is that both parties have been repeating the same mistakes of previous administrations. What is the point of history if we can't learn from it? Democratic Party Chairman Howard Dean was correct when he said that the capture of Saddam Hussein would have little practical impact on success in Iraq. It seems rather ridiculous and even childish to get the world's most advanced army to chase Osama Bin Laden. It is naive to think that capturing him would mean success in defeating terrorism. Even when the man is long gone, his radical ideas will still prevail. You cannot fight an idea by killing off people who may or may not represent it. You cannot fight an idea with weapons; it only strengthens the martyr and upholds the notion.
The problem with this mess is the whole concept of the "War on Terror". The title itself denotes a self-righteous, or rather contradictory, approach in "defending" American citizens. Must America destroy half the world in order to defend its citizens?
America only practices democracy on its own soil because, as evidence shows, its foreign policy is far from being diplomatic and hinders democracy in other countries. Since when does America have the right to take over Guantanamo Bay, helping the establishment of the state of Israel and basically going in and out of any country that it sees fit? This approach gives it the "holier than thou" right in defining international mores. Former president George W. Bush said the following when explaining why he sent troops to Iraq, "Imagine a world where Saddam Hussein was there, stirring up even more problems in a part of the world that had so much resentment, so much hatred that people came and killed 3,000 of our citizens." He also stated that he wanted to bring hope and freedom to the Middle East. That is perfect evidence of the pompous attitude that I was referring to: The idea that Arabs and Muslims are intolerant and resentful of Americans but still are in need of America in order to survive.
Bush has said many times that he wanted to change the Middle East. The word "change" offends me since it is America's definition of "change" that is used. It is the unsolicited change - which Middle Easterners never voted for - that has created terrorism. People like Bush are the ones who created Bin Laden. I am not condoning Bin Laden's actions, but I think that greed can be easily disguised as patriotism.
I hate to point fingers at Obama and call him a smooth talker, but Obama's agenda does not seem too smooth anymore. I honestly don't know if Obama's attempt to reconcile the Muslim world with America is sincere or opportunistic. Whether Obama's intention is to truly defend Americans and the Afghans, he still needs to consider the ramifications that result because of war. It was reported a few weeks ago in the Wall Street Journal how innocent Afghani civilians were accidentally killed by American military. It seems the mistake of "giving hope" to this region needs to be considered carefully. The slogan "change" disgusts me with its unimaginative, fascist approach. The word "change" deems feminism, liberty and democracy as an absolutist idea for those who have the power to dictate its meaning. Why should America have the right to occupy other sovereign countries as it wishes, while Iraqis have to have permission in order to experiment on their own soil?
If America wants peace and wants to end terrorism, then it must begin with ending the obvious and, sometimes, latent racial and religious hatred that it has toward Muslims and Middle Easterners. The dogmatic fascist phrase "War on Terror" should change forreal world peace to occur. The U.S. government needs to put its credos in its own context instead of having an absolutist mindset by which all other cultures must adhere. Society needs to understand that it's been fed rubbish for a long time. True world peace happens when the military steps back and people step forward.
- Carmen Awad is an IC Columnist and sophomore majoring in business administration.

Load-Date: June 4, 2014


End of Document