Unraveling the mystery of an airliner's crash
St. Petersburg Times (Florida)
April 8, 1990, Sunday, City Edition


Times Publishing Company
Section: PERSPECTIVE; books; Pg. 7D; COLUMN
Length: 1002 words
Byline: Daryl Frazell
Body


If you are in the mood for a detective story, consider The Fall of Pan Am 103: Inside the Lockerbie Investigation, by Steven Emerson and Brian Duffy (Putnam, $ 21.95). It has an intricate plot and is peopled by real detectives chasing real clues. Unfortunately, the ending is unsatisfactory. The chief villain remains at large.
 
    Emerson is a former senior editor of U.S. News & World Report, and Duffy is assistant managing editor of the magazine. Their book touches on the agony of the survivors of the 259 people who were aboard Pan Am 103 when it was blown up by a terrorist bomb over Scotland on Dec. 21, 1988, and on the suffering and courage of the citizens of Lockerbie, where the wreckage fell like rain, but its focus is an unsentimental account of the vast effort by American and British investigators to find out who was to blame for the crime.
   It's hard to grasp the magnitude of the task of searching 800 square miles of often difficult terrain inch by inch for fragments of the plane and its contents, then recording and classifying every piece. The wreckage of the aircraft was painstakingly reassembled on a framework. Personal effects were collected in clear plastic bags.  Bodies were encased in opaque plastic.
 
    Out of all this the investigators concentrated on three items:
 
      A hard-sided Samsonite suitcase that had been blown to bits and transformed in color from copper to blue.
 
      Plastic fragments of the case of a radio-cassette player.
 
      A baby's blue cotton jumpsuit.
 
    Investigators believe the suitcase contained the bomb. Its color was altered by the heat of the blast. Whose suitcase was it, and how did it get aboard Flight 103? No conclusive evidence has been found, but investigators suspect that a Lebanese passenger, Khalid Jaafar, 23, whose father lives in Dearborn, Mich., was somehow duped into checking the bag as his own, even though it was not among the luggage witnesses saw him carrying.
 
    The radio-cassette player was a Toshiba Bombeat, a type sold only in North Africa and the Middle East. In October 1988, before the Pan Am disaster, German detectives seized a Bombeat during "Autumn Leaves," a nationwide roundup of terrorist suspects. The aptly named Bombeat contained a bomb that could be activated by a barometer and seemed to have been designed for only one purpose, to sabotage an airplane. The explosive was a clay-like substance called Semtex, manufactured in Czechoslovakia.
 
    Investigators now believe that the operation broken up by the Germans that October was an extensive plot to blow up several airliners at the same time, killing as many as 1,000 people.  Unfortunately, the Germans did not keep all the suspects in custody and allowed an identical radio-cassette player to slip through their hands the device that destroyed Pan Am 103.
 
    The baby's jumpsuit was one of the items packed around the radio-cassette player inside the Samsonite suitcase. Its label remained legible: Babygro, a brand made in Malta. The garment's purchaser was remembered by a witness in Malta, who described him as resembling Libyan leader Moammar Gadhafi. Investigators believe the purchaser was actually Mohammed Abu Talb, a Palestinian now serving a life sentence in Sweden for terrorist bombings in Stockholm and Copenhagen.
 
    The result of all this detective work is a chain of evidence that points toward Ahmed Jibril, head of the Popular Front for the Liberation of Palestine-General Command, headquartered in Syria.  Jibril denies it, but investigators think he was a hired gun, paid by the Iranians to exact revenge for the shooting down of an Iranian airliner by the U.S. warship Vincennes on July 3, 1988.
 
    Hafez Dalkamouni, Jibril's chief lieutenant, is believed to have been in direct command of the attack on Pan Am 103. In jail in West Germany, facing other terrorist charges, Dalkamouni is not talking.
 
    The Germans also had in their hands at one time the bomb's maker, Merwad Kreeshat, described by the authors as a mysterious figure who may have been a double or even a triple agent. What cause he actually served is anybody's guess. He disappeared after a German court released him.
 
    The prospect is slim that Jibril, Dalkamouni, Kreeshat and a long list of others will ever be brought to trial in the Pan Am bombing.  Even if they are, the authors say, the evidence is the kind that can be easily brushed aside by a skillful lawyer.     If the Germans' Autumn Leaves operation had been more effective, the Pan Am disaster might never have happened.  Emerson and Duffy suggest that the case conveys some lessons that must be heeded to prevent the tragedy from being repeated someday. They report a "growing concern" among some government officials "that the U.S. has boxed itself in by precluding the use of force" against terrorists.
 
    "A senior U.S. official with long experience in investigations of terrorism says there is a growing sense, based on a review of the Autumn Leaves operation, that terrorism cases should not be treated as any other police matter. In drug investigations, for instance, detectives occasionally allow a shipment of narcotics to pass into smugglers' hands to learn more about the distribution network and sources of financing. Terrorism cases, this official said, cannot be handled that way. When there are too many questions and evidence of unaccounted-for bombs or weapons, arrests should be made quickly. Monday-morning quarterbacking of police investigations is a dreary business; there is always another lead that should have been followed more aggressively, or a clue that was missed. In this instance, however, officials say the lesson seems apt: When in doubt during an investigation of terrorism, police should move sooner rather than later."
 
    Such a law enforcement policy would raise the danger of abuses of civil liberties. Ultimately, it seems, there may be further casualties of The Fall of Pan Am 103.
 - Daryl Frazell is book editor of the St. Petersburg Times. 

Graphic

 
BLACK AND WHITE PHOTO, Associated Press; Salvage experts with a piece of Pan Am 103 that was found 12 miles from the Lockerbie crash site

Load-Date: November 13, 1992


End of Document