Unreasonable fear is a victory for terrorism
USA TODAY
July 11, 2002, Thursday,
FINAL EDITION


Copyright 2002 Gannett Company, Inc.
Section: NEWS;; DEBATE
Length: 304 words
Body

As our nation celebrated its 226th birthday, I thought of those brave men who wrote and signed the Declaration of Independence. They knew that by signing, their very lives were at risk.
Today, I look at a nation frozen by fear. Nineteen dead men have held more than 280 million American men, women and children hostage for nearly 10 months. We trust no one. We strip-search grandmothers and pat ourselves on the back as we disarm them by taking fingernail files that might be used to topple our country. We provide the greatest victory to the Sept. 11 terrorists ("USA engages in guarded celebration: Security tight for 4th of July; parched areas ban fireworks," News, Friday).
We must no longer allow the fear of terrorism to paralyze us and cause us to abuse our citizens. Too many Americans simply accept any measure if it is done in the name of safety. Others dislike the unacceptable loss of human dignity, but remain silent.
If we must sacrifice part of our personal freedom and dignity, it should at least be done with a reasonable certainty of deterring terrorists.
Politicians must stop using the threat of terrorism to frighten people and stop telling voters what a great job they are doing to keep us safe.
Any counterterrorism expert would argue that we have done virtually nothing that would prevent terrorism. We simply do things that can be seen by the public in the hope of garnering more support for bureaucrats. There is no solution that's foolproof, but our current measures stop only fools. We must quit wasting time, effort and money.
Former president Franklin D. Roosevelt said in his first inaugural address: "The only thing we have to fear is fear itself." Add to that: "and the bureaucrats using the fight against terrorism to aggrandize themselves and increase their budgets."
Robin Harris
Chesterfield, Mo.

Load-Date: July 11, 2002


End of Document