Unsettling verdicts in terrorism cases
LANCASTER NEW ERA (LANCASTER, PA.)
July 20, 2002, Saturday


Copyright 2002 Lancaster Newspapers, Inc.
Section: COMMENTARY,; EDITORIALS
Length: 522 words
Body


Two convictions of terrorists this week, one in Virginia and one in Pakistan, do not necessarily project favorably on future efforts to bring conspiratorial murderers to justice.
Ahmed Omar Sheikh was sentenced to death in Pakistan for his leading role in the kidnapping and murder of Wall Street Journal reporter Daniel Pearl. Other defendants in the case were sentenced to life in prison.
#CONVICTS.BRU.mal#
These sentences were appropriate for an atrocious crime and show the world that justice can be served against terrorism even in a nation where many people are sympathetic to terrorists.
But the reaction to Sheikh's promise to take revenge for the sentence is unsettling. Many Pakistanis said they feared further terrorism after Sheikh pronounced, "We shall see who will die first -- either I or the authorities who arranged the death sentence for me."
Let us hope this is an empty threat. Even so, it has had a chilling effect on Pakistanis already unnerved by reports of al-Qaida terrorists moving into their country from Afghanistan and by the ongoing conflict with India on the other border.
By comparison to Sheikh's sentence, the prosecution of John Walker Lindh in Virginia was a travesty. Attorney General John Ashcroft originally called for life imprisonment of the "American Taliban." Lindh wound up getting 20 years in jail in exchange for a pledge to cooperate with the U.S. government.
Of utmost concern, charges of terrorism against Lindh were dropped entirely as part of the plea bargain. He simply pleaded guilty to providing military services to the Taliban and carrying a rifle and grenades in the commission of this felony.
True, Lindh is only 21 years old and a fool, but young fools often serve long prison terms in America for less serious crimes than Lindh originally was charged with.
One of the counts against Lindh that the government dropped was that he ha conspired to kill Americans. The family of Johnny Michael Spann, the CIA officer whom Lindh's terrorist buddies actually did kill, does not support the government's decision to go easy on Lindh.
Even if Lindh fully abides by his plea bargain and tells everything he knows about his relationship with the Taliban and al-Qaida, the government is not going to get much of substance. A 21-year-old fool hardly was privy to al-Qaida's inner workings.
So Ahmed Sheikh's sentence was just but continued threats of terrorism may yet make him a martyr to the warped cause of radical Muslims; and John Lindh's sentence was unjust and may come back to haunt future terrorism cases.
Lawyers for Zacarias Moussaoui, allegedly the would-be 20th hijacker, and Richard C. Reid, allegedly a would-be shoe bomber, may be able to use the government's leniency in the Lindh case to get breaks for their clients.
And how will the Lindh sentence affect all those al-Qaida prisoners awaiting trial in Cuba?
Considering what these people tried to do to us and what their friends at large are still trying to do, we are hardly sending a strong message of rebuke when our courts drop charges of terrorism and murder conspiracy and agree to let this terrorist go free when he turns 40.

Load-Date: July 21, 2002


End of Document