Upcoming film 'Beauty for Ashes' centers around stories of OKC bombing survivors, first responders
Oklahoma Daily: University of Oklahoma Norman Campus
April 19, 2017 Wednesday


University Wire
Copyright 2017 UWIRE via U-Wire All Rights Reserved
Section: ARTS & ENTERTAINMENT; Pg. 1
Length: 439 words
Byline: Chloe Moores
Body


Twenty-two years have passed since Timothy McVeigh and Terry Nichols carried out a terrorist attack on the Alfred P. Murrah building in downtown Oklahoma City April 19, 1995. The event will be remembered in a new way in the full-length feature film, "Beauty for Ashes" next year. 
The screenplay for the film was created by former Little Rock-based radio talk show host, Princella Smith, and is currently a finalist in the 2017 Nashville Film Festival, according to a press release. The film is due to be released in theaters sometime in 2018, according to IMDb. 
Mark Raymond, assistant professor of international security, said that whether or not films like "Beauty for Ashes" create positive dialogue in society depends on the nature of the film.
"I think it's quite important to try and be balanced and to try and be fact-oriented and to try and present things in a manner that recognizes life as complicated, and it's not always helpful to sort of overgeneralize things and inflame people's emotions on a very difficult topic," Raymond said. 
The "post 9/11 generation" often views terrorism "a particular way, committed by particular kinds of groups for a particular reason, but terrorism has been a tactic that has been employed by a wide array of different kinds of political groups with very different political agendas over the last couple centuries, at least," Raymond said. 
Right-wing terrorism - the kind of terrorism that took place in the Oklahoma City bombing - was and is a major concern, Raymond said.
"This notion of right-wing terrorism is a major part of the terrorism landscape and not one we are very good at remembering," Raymond said. 
Raymond believes films like "Beauty for Ashes" can be "important cultural touchstones, but we need to make sure we are sending the right message," he said.
"Beauty for Ashes" will focus on telling the stories of the parents and first responders in the Oklahoma City bombing. In particular, the film will focus on telling the story of Captain Chris Fields, who was photographed carrying deceased 1-year-old Baylee Almon away from the building's rubble. Additionally, the film will feature Aren Almon-Kok, Baylee's mother; Dr. Raymund King, a doctor at the University of Oklahoma Medical Center during the bombing; and Daina Bradley, the last survivor found in the remains of the bombing, according to a press release. 
Geoff Ryan has signed on as the director for "Beauty for Ashes," according to the release. Ryan is known for directing the 2012 film "Fray," a film about a marine returning to civilian life after war. 
The teaser trailer for "Beauty for Ashes" can be viewed below. 

Load-Date: January 17, 2018


End of Document