Updated: Pick of Napolitano for DHS Wins Bipartisan Praise
CongressNow
December 1, 2008 Monday


Copyright 2008 GalleryWatch All Rights Reserved
Section: Homeland Security
Length: 765 words
Byline: Sara Ditta, CongressNow Staff
Body


Both Senate and House Homeland Security committee leaders today praised President-elect Barack Obama's choice of Arizona Gov. Janet Napolitano (D) to head the Department of Homeland Security.
While the comments do not preclude a significant grilling of Napolitano - who is being tapped to head the department that has been roundly criticized for organizational shortcomings and which oversees such controversial policy areas as immigration enforcement, disaster recovery and anti-terrorism - they do suggest that the Arizona governor is a strong bet to be confirmed.
Senate Homeland Security and Governmental Affairs Chairman Joe Lieberman (ID-Conn.) called Napolitano a "strong" nominee with whom he has a long history.
"She knows first-hand both the border security vulnerabilities and the economic opportunities presented by our long border with Mexico," he said in a statement. "I respectfully look forward to hearing the governor's perspective on the anti-terrorism responsibilities of the Department."
Ranking member Susan Collins (R-Maine) also applauded the choice.
"As a governor of a border state, Janet Napolitano understands the importance of developing policies that will not impede legitimate travel and trade but will keep our enemies out," she said in a statement. "I spoke with the governor earlier today and look forward to working with Sen. Lieberman to consider this nomination carefully and expeditiously."
Sen. John McCain (R), a fellow Arizonan, commended the choice before it became official today. Napolitano's experience as governor should allow for a quick confirmation, he said late last month in a statement.
Though Napolitano will only have to be confirmed by the Senate, House leaders also expressed support for her appointment.
House Homeland Security Chairman Bennie Thompson (D-Miss.) said in a statement that Napolitano "will be a great asset to the nation."
She understands the value of working with states and strengthening border security, he added.
On Nov. 20, House Homeland Security ranking member Peter King (R-N.Y.) said that he was "looking forward to working with Gov. Napolitano in a bipartisan way on all homeland security issues - particularly counter-terrorism and border security."
Napolitano was re-elected in 2006 for a second term as governor. Previously, she served as the state's attorney general. She became widely known in policy circles when she chaired the National Governors Association.
Napolitano has expressed skepticism about the recent initiative to build 700 miles of fencing along the U.S.-Mexico border, repeatedly stating that if one builds a 50 foot wall, somebody will find a 51 foot ladder.
She also expressed dismay about Congress' inability to pass effective immigration legislation.
"We've heard too much talk about border security and not enough action," Napolitano said in a speech last year. Congress must "end the rhetoric, stop the politics, provide sustained funding and turn away from extreme, unworkable solutions that solve nothing and only delay the benefits of real reform."
Her state is a hotbed of opposition to illegal immigration, and observers say she has generally taken a tougher line on border security than some in her own party have.
An official with the Congressional Hispanic Caucus said that the group had no comment on Napolitano's appointment and a call to Sen. Jeff Sessions (R-Ala.) - one of the chamber's fiercest critics of illegal immigration - was not immediately returned.
Ali Noorani -- executive director of the National Immigration Forum, which includes immigrant advocates and business groups that oppose crackdowns on immigration -- called Napolitano a great choice and a proven leader of domestic security.
"We're not sure there could have been a better pick for this incredibly important position," he said. No one can better understand border enforcement, immigration enforcement, trade and visas than her, Noorani added. "She's had the experience of seeing it from all sides of the box."
Independent experts have also joined those in favor of Napolitano.
William Galston, a senior fellow at the Brookings Institution, said he considers it a "superb" choice.
Galston said he sat down and conversed with her in the past and knows she is a dynamic leader with a background that has prepared her to deal with many homeland security issues.
"I would expect her to be a strong and fair leader of an organization that I think is still struggling to find its identity and to turn into a whole that is more than the sum of its parts."
He added that he expects Napolitano to be easily confirmed by the Senate.

Load-Date: December 2, 2008


End of Document