UPTOWN TERRORIST Wanna-be jihadi who used Qaeda plans busted just before he could test bomb: cops
Daily News (New York)
November 21, 2011 Monday
METRO EDITION


Copyright 2011 Daily News, L.P.


Section: NEWS; Pg. 3
Length: 533 words
Byline: BY ALISON GENDAR, ROCCO PARASCANDOLA and BILL HUTCHINSON NEW YORK DAILY NEWS With Joseph Straw and Reuven Blau
Body


A LONE WOLF with an anti-American grudge has been charged with plotting to kill cops and soldiers with bombs he was building in his Manhattan apartment from an Al Qaeda recipe, officials said Sunday.
Jose Pimentel, 27, told cops he was within an hour of finishing a powerful pipe bomb when the NYPD raided his Washington Heights apartment at 3:30 p.m. Saturday.
Police Commissioner Raymond Kelly said Pimentel planned to test three bombs on mailboxes and was plotting to eventually use the explosives on soldiers returning from Afghanistan and Iraq.
Kelly said Pimentel, an American citizen who was born in the Dominican Republic, also targeted a police station in Bayonne, N.J., and postal facilities.
Pimentel, who also went by the name Muhammad Yusuf, told a police informant that he hoped his attacks would grab the public's attention to show "there was mujahedeen in the city ready to wage jihad."
"The suspect was a so-called lone wolf, motivated by his own resentment of the presence of American troops in Iraq and Afghanistan, as well as inspired by Al Qaeda propaganda," Mayor Bloomberg said at a press conference Sunday night, adding there was no evidence Pimentel was linked to an organized Al Qaeda cell.
"He represents exactly the kind of threat FBI Director Robert Mueller and his experts have warned about, as American military and intelligence agencies have eroded Al Qaeda's ability to launch large-scale attacks," Bloomberg said.
Kelly said NYPD intelligence officers had been monitoring Pimentel's every move since May 2009, when he was noticed pledging support for Al Qaeda on his own website, TrueIslam1.com.
He also expressed sympathy for his "heroes" Osama Bin Laden and Saddam Hussein, Kelly said.
The police commissioner said Pimentel was a follower of Anwar al-Awlaki, the American-born jihadist cleric killed in September in a CIA-led drone strike in Yemen.
He said the home-grown would-be saboteur was following a bomb-making recipe he found in Inspire magazine, a publication of the group Al Qaeda in the Arabian Peninsula.
The recipe was titled, "Open Source Jihad: Make a Bomb in the Kitchen of your Mom."
Bloomberg and Kelly showed a video of a Mazda being blown to shreds by three elbow-pipe bombs similar to those Pimentel was building.
Since mid-October, Pimentel had been purchasing parts for his bombs at a Home Depot in the Bronx and at a 99
-cent store in Manhattan, Kelly said.
In a Nov. 4 video taken of him at his apartment, he is seen following instructions to scrape matchheads and use the powder in explosives he planned to pack with nails.
Over the weekend, he began drilling holes in an elbow pipe, which he connected with wires to an alarm clock, Christmas tree lights and 9-volt battery.
He told cops he "was about one hour away from completing it" when they bust into his uptown pad.
"Islamic law obligates all Muslims to wage war against the U.S.," Pimentel told cops, according to a criminal complaint filed against him by the Manhattan district attorney's office.
Pimentel was awaiting arraignment Sunday night on charges of criminal possession of a weapon as a crime of terrorism, conspiracy and soliciting support for an act of terrorism.
rparascandola@nydailynews.com

Graphic

 
Re-creation of bomb that alleged jihad plotter Jose Pimentel (photo below) was building and footage of test bombing with such a device from video Police Commissioner Raymond Kelly showed media at news conference announcing charges against Pimentel on Sunday. Photos by Aaron Showalter

Load-Date: November 22, 2011


End of Document