Urumqi Authorities Tighten Security on Buses
The New York Times Blogs 
(Sinosphere)
July 25, 2014 Friday


Copyright 2014 The News York Times Company All Rights Reserved
Section: WORLD; asia
Length: 470 words
Byline: AMY QIN
Highlight: The authorities in Urumqi, capital of the western Chinese region of Xinjiang, have banned passengers on public buses from carrying liquids, lighters and some powders as part of a continuing effort to tighten security following several deadly terrorist attacks. 
Body


The authorities in Urumqi, capital of the western Chinese region of Xinjiang, have banned passengers on public buses from carrying liquids, lighters and some powders as part of a continuing effort to tighten security following several deadly terrorist attacks in the city this year, a state-run newspaper reported on Friday.  
The decision to implement the ban was made at a meeting of Urumqi officials amid increasing concern across China about public transportation safety, according to a report in Legal Daily, citing an employee of the Urumqi Municipal Transportation Bureau. It comes after three separate arson attacks on buses were reported within 10 days this month - one in the eastern city of Hangzhou that wounded 32, a failed attack in the central city of Changsha and one in the southern city of Guangzhou that left two people dead and 32 wounded.
According to the Legal Daily report, people looking to board buses in Urumqi will be checked by one of two security personnel assigned to each bus for items such as bottled water and other beverages, cooking oil and yogurt, as well as explosive powders, including gunpowder, cigarette lighters, gasoline and firecrackers. The ban is being enforced on each of the 154 bus routes in and around Urumqi, said Legal Daily. Bus drivers are being asked to be more vigilant as well, in addition to fulfilling their basic driving responsibilities.
Security has been stepped up for buses in other parts of the country as well, with the Ministry of Public Securitydemanding last week that all buses and subway trains in the country be staffed with security personnel.
Efforts to strengthen security measures have been especially pronounced in Xinjiang, the traditional homeland of the mostly Muslim ethnic Uighurs. In May, the authorities announced a yearlong crackdown on terrorism in Xinjiang after two cars plowed into a crowded marketplace in Urumqi, killing 39 and wounding 94, according to official reports.
It was one in a string of high-profile attacks in China over the past year. Two others were also focused on transportation hubs, one a stabbing rampage in March at the railroad station in Kunming, which the authorities linked to Xinjiang separatists,  and the other a bombing in April at the railroad station in Urumqi. 
While the focus has been on antiterrorism in Xinjiang, the recent spate of arson attacks on buses in other parts of the country has reinforced the notion that public transportation attacks are not limited to organized groups driven by political or ethnic grievances. In the arson attacks in Hangzhou, Changsha and Guangzhou, investigators ruled out terrorism. Instead, in each of the cases the suspects were determined to be disgruntled young men acting alone and venting their anger over financial or other personal woes.
                      

Load-Date: July 25, 2014


End of Document