US-Europe ties bump along
Christian Science Monitor (Boston, MA)
April 22, 1986, Tuesday


Copyright 1986 The Christian Science Publishing Society
Section: International; Pg. 1
Length: 774 words
Byline: By Elizabeth Pond, Staff writer of The Christian Science Monitor
Dateline: Bonn
Highlight: Libya, food exports, arms control present obstacles
Body


Some waffling, some fudging, and a murmur.
This is the latest score on the three issues potentially straining relations between Western Europe and the United States: Libya, food exports, and arms control.
The waffling came as European Community foreign ministers, meeting for the third time in eight days to discuss terrorism, voted to restrict Libyans' freedom of movement in Europe - but did not curtail trade with Libya.
The fudging came as US and European negotiators put off settling their conflict in cereal and soybean exports until after the Western economic summit next month.
The murmur came as various West German government spokesmen in particular commented that the West should not just dismiss the latest Soviet arms control proposals as propaganda.
(Meanwhile, President Reagan said yesterday that some US allies had suggested a larger attack on Libya, the Associated Press reported. ''Some of them suggested that, . . . if we were going to resort to force, that then perhaps it should be a wider-based and a more all-out effort to change the Libyan policy,'' the President said.)
In the hottest issue, the EC did move closer to agreeing with US insistence that some action be taken to raise the cost to Libyan leader Col. Muammar Qaddafi for supporting terrorism. The foreign ministers, meeting in Luxembourg yesterday, agreed to reduce to a minimum the number of Libyan diplomats accredited to EC countries, to confine them largely to their assigned localities, and to bar from all EC nations Libyans who have been kicked out of any one EC state on suspicion of abetting terrorism.
Previous national bans on export of weapons to Libya were also reconfirmed.
Despite many hints that the foreign ministers' conference might take stronger measures, however, the EC did not go much beyond its statement of a week ago, just before the US raid on Libya. Britain had wanted to block economic credits to Libya and to close all its people's bureaus (embassies) in the EC. Greece resisted stronger steps and agreed even to Monday's measures only reluctantly.
Full-blown economic sanctions are improbable in any case. The West Germans and some other European nations have been quietly cutting Libyan oil imports, but these imports remain substantial.
The incentive for the Europeans to toughen their measures against Libya is strong. They consider the American military strike on Libya to be counterproductive - strengthening rather than weakening Colonel Qaddafi - and they want to take at least enough action to forestall a second US military strike.
In this context, the Europeans hope especially that some recent successes in security and intelligence cooperation will hearten the US and convince it that the Europeans really are acting with the US against terrorism. In this regard, the Europeans cite not only discovery of a bomb intended for a commercial airliner at Heathrow Airport, but also the arrest - just made public - by West German police of a Palestinian as a suspect in the April 5 bombing of a West Berlin disco that killed a US soldier. That bombing triggered the US strike on Libya.
In the agricultural dispute, Clayton Yeutter, the US special trade representative, has flown back to the US after fruitless negotiations with the EC over the weekend about American sales of cereals and soybeans to Portugal and Spain. The difficulty arises from the entry of these two countries into the EC this year and new EC restrictions on outside imports. The US, which views the quotas as illegal, says its retaliation will only be commensurate with US losses incurred. The EC, which regards the restrictions as legal, doesn't believe this, however.
US-European differences over arms control are much less conspicuous than those over Libya and food exports at this point. At their root is the European persuasion that arms control is an essential element of security, which contrasts with the Pentagon's strong supicious of arms control.
So far Moscow has not exploited these differences very well, in that it has not backed up the sometimes attractive arms control proposals it makes in public with concrete offers at the negotiating table. This has greatly reduced their appeal to Western European governments.
But if the Soviets close this gap when the arms control talks resume in Geneva next month, the Europeans may well press for a more favorable US counteroffer than Washington is prepared to make. Already, the rhetorical response of West German officials to the latest Soviet proposal for ''significant reductions'' in conventional forces in Europe ''from the Atlantic to the Urals'' has been more favorable than the American response.


End of Document