US-Soviet Teamwork on Terrorism
Christian Science Monitor (Boston, MA)
March 10, 1989, Friday


Copyright 1989 The Christian Science Publishing Society
Section: OPINION; Pg. 18
Length: 698 words
Byline: Geoffrey Kemp and Augustus Richard Norton; Geoffrey Kemp is a senior associate at the Carnegie Endowment for International Peace. Augustus Richard Norton is associate professor of comparative politics at the United States Military Academy.
Body


UP to now, the Soviet Union has acted as if terrorism were an understandable reaction to Western imperialism, rather than a global blight. This attitude is changing.
One reason is a new Soviet vulnerability to terrorism. There was a skyjacking in the western Ukraine in January, and over the last four years about 60 Soviets, including diplomats and scientists, have been killed.
Another reason is a new awareness that terrorism can poison relations with the United States. The region where the terrorist is most dangerous is the Middle East. Both superpowers share an interest in preventing catalytic acts of violence, which might not only derail the search for an Arab-Israeli peace but could provoke a new war.
In late January, in Moscow, we participated in a non-official conference organized to explore the possibility of US-Soviet cooperation against terrorism. The sessions were marked by level-headed, reasoned exchanges, with few outbursts of propaganda. Although none of the participants spoke for their respective governments, the meeting could not have been held without the Kremlin's sanction. On technical questions and the ''management'' of counter-terrorism, the Soviets profess they have a lot to learn.
A number of possibilities for effective cooperation, both to forestall terrorism and to control its consequences, emerged:
*Improved channels of communication for exchange of information and other forms of assistance, especially during crises.
*Prohibition on the transfer of military explosives and certain classes of weapons to non-government organizations.
*Bilateral efforts to require ''tags'' on commercial and military explosives to aid detection and to trace them to their source.
*Joint measures to stop the spread of chemical, biological, and nuclear devices to terrorists.
*Joint exercises, simulations, and exchanges of technology for combatting terrorism (with due regard, of course, to each side's right to preserve its national security interests).
Cooperation on international terrorism cannot be a one-way street. Since the US has better technology to share, it is fair to expect that Moscow will aggressively disassociate itself from egregious characters like Abu Nidal, who should know that they risk arrest if they set foot on Soviet or Warsaw Pact soil.
There is an especially compelling need to discuss better controls on certain military technologies. In addition to the risk of nuclear and chemical nightmares, the growing availability of lightweight surface-to-air missiles, like the American Stinger and the Soviet SAM-7, raises the prospect that civil airliners will be blasted out of the sky, as happened in the western Sahara last year. Hundreds of Stinger launchers and missiles have been provided to the Afghan mujahideen. The US must think about how this dangerous crop of weapons can be recovered, even if it means buying them back on the free-wheeling global arms market. With the Soviet withdrawal, the justification for the liberal dispensing of Stingers has eased.
Effective cooperation between Washington and Moscow requires that both sides strive to foster an international climate in which those countries who support terrorist groups will be treated as pariahs. A good beginning might be a joint statement denouncing, in no uncertain terms, all acts of violence against innocent victims. The point is to delegitimize terrorism as a tactic, and to consider its perpetrators worthy only of vigorous pursuit and unflinching prosecution.
The Soviet Union is in the midst of a major reshaping of its Middle East policy, and this shift is reflected in its changing view on international terrorism. Both sides understand that well-planned acts of terrorism - against civilian aircraft or on one of the Middle East's many religious sites, for instance - could stall or even derail the peace process. Moreover, Yasser Arafat's effort to tread a centrist path could provoke attacks by extremist elements against both US and Soviet targets. Moscow now recognizes that terrorism respects no boundaries, not even ideological ones. US-Soviet cooperation will not stop terrorism, but it can help to further isolate its practitioners and contain its ravages.


End of Document