US demands due process for detained 'Hotel Rwanda' hero
Stillman Advance: Stillman College
September 4, 2020 Friday


University Wire
Copyright 2020 UWIRE via U-Wire All Rights Reserved
Section: WORLD NEWS; Pg. 1
Length: 469 words
Byline: Steven Clarke
Body


The official police statement, "Through global cooperation, the Rwanda Bureau of Investigation wants to inform the general public that Paul Rusesabagina has been arrested".
A longtime critic of President Paul Kagame's rule, his travel immediately raises questions why he got on the jet, knowing he would face charges in Rwanda.
Rwandan police said on Monday that Rusesabagina - who called for armed resistance to the now Tutsi-led government in a 2018 YouTube video - had been arrested on terrorism charges on an global warrant. He believes that he is a victim due to the conduct of the Rwandan Patriotic Front in ending the genocide.
"Paul Rusesabagina is a Rwandan accused of crimes that were committed in Rwanda against Rwandan citizens and thus will be tried by a Rwandan court", Foreign Affairs Minister and government spokesman, Vincent Biruta, said by telephone.
US President George W Bush presents his Presidential Medal of Freedom to Paul Rusesabagina, who sheltered people at a hotel he managed during the 1994 Rwandan genocide, at a ceremony in the East Room of the White House in Washington November 9, 2005.
The Rwandan government's past attempts to charge his father internationally had failed, he said.
The RPF was eventually able to provide aid, allowing Rusesabagina to escape to Tanzania with his family and the refugees.
Pac-12 announces COVID-19 testing initiative for student-athletes
Quidel's Sofia 2 testing machines and tests are expected to be delivered to each of the Pac-12's athletic departments by the end of September, according to the release.
He and his family received threats during the genocide by Hutu extremists.
Many observers of Rwandan politics are suspicious of the charges against Rusesabagina, because the RPF regime has a record of using prosecution to intimidate opponents.
Rusesabagina took charge of the luxury establishment on April 12, 1994, when ethnic Tutsis were being hunted down across the country. He publicly denounced Kagame in a December 2018 YouTube video and was identified as the leader of the Mouvement Rwandais pour le Changement Démocratique and the National Forces of Liberation in Burundi.
This is a sentiment shared by several human rights groups that have grown more critical of Kagame in recent years. "What Kagame and Rwanda's ruling party have effectively done is to make the argument, both in rhetoric and in practice, that criticism, resistance or opposition to their rule amounts to terrorism". His family accuses Rwanda of kidnapping him, saying they last heard from him in Dubai.
United Arab Emirates officials have not commented on his arrest.
Rwandan investigators say Rusesabagina, who was played by United States actor Don Cheadle in the 2004 Oscar-nominated film "Hotel Rwanda", was arrested "through global cooperation" but have refused to elaborate.

Load-Date: September 5, 2020


End of Document