US embassies under siege by terrorism
Christian Science Monitor (Boston, MA)
January 29, 1986, Wednesday


Copyright 1986 The Christian Science Publishing Society
Section: Zee Pg.; Pg. 14
Length: 1213 words
Byline: By George D. Moffett III, Staff writer of The Christian Science Monitor
Dateline: Lima, Peru
Highlight: The isolation of American diplomacy
Body


Near the top of his profession, with a rank just below ambassador, John Youle enjoys the privileges - and also the growing list of inconveniences - that come with being a senior US Foreign Service officer abroad in an age of terrorism.
Every morning the 47-year-old deputy chief of mission at the United States Embassy in Lima, Peru, bids goodbye to his wife - and to the armed guards that protect his secured residence around the clock. An armed chauffeur drives him to work in an armored car. On even the hottest days in this arid, equatorial city he's required to keep the bullet-resistant car windows tightly closed.
At work, he takes his seat inside an embassy guarded by machine-gun-toting Peruvian guards and a detachment of US marines, conducting the day's business behind shatterproof glass windows and iron bars, and within easy access to the embassy's ''safe haven,'' a temporary refuge in case of mob attack.
For Mr. Youle, and for thousands of other US Foreign Service officers (FSO) around the world, these are the most obvious signs that the job of being a US diplomat abroad has become one of the most dangerous in the world.
Before the mid-1960s, according to the State Department, not a single American diplomat was murdered abroad for political reasons. Since then more than 70, including six ambassadors, have been killed and many others wounded. American citizens and property have become targets of nearly one-third of all international terrorist incidents.
For Youle, who chose a career in the Foreign Service over banking and law, it's all part of the job. ''If you feel the work is important, you don't mind running the risks. The Foreign Service has given me a chance to accomplish things, to do something for my country, to help make relations with other countries better. It's hard to imagine another career where you're playing such a part in history.''
At the State Department, providing protection for over 6,000 Foreign Service employees abroad has become an urgent task. The department is now engaged in a seven-year, $4 billion-plus program to upgrade embassy facilities and security procedures around the world.
The department's various security-related activities are also being consolidated into a new Bureau for Diplomatic Security headed by Assistant Secretary of State Robert E. Lamb.
Says Mr. Lamb: ''The new bureau represents a commitment that the department's taking security seriously. We're tellng our employees, and the world at large, that this is an important issue for us.''
State Department officials say the challenge of providing security for US diplomats abroad is epitomized in Lima, a city of 6 million people. Here, 200 embassy officials like John Youle live on the margin of danger as they tend to the day-to-day business of keeping relations with a key Latin nation on an even keel.
Department officials regard Peru, the second poorest country in the region, as one of the most dangerous posts in South America.
Since 1980, the country has been terrorized by Sendero Luminoso (Shining Path) guerrillas. Peruvian officials say the war against the radical Marxist group has been responsible for close to 7,000 deaths.
In May 1985, Sendero terrorists tossed dynamite over the wall of the US ambassador's residence in Lima. Sendero is also believed to be responsible for damage last year to a nearby US Agency for International Development annex. Forty windows were shattered in the building when a car bomb was detonated across the street at a Peruvian police precinct.
Another terrorist group, the Lima-based Tupac Amaru Revolutionary Movement (MRTA) has claimed responsibility for a recent machine-gun and bomb attack on the embassy chancery, as well as attacks on the offices of US firms in Lima, including IBM, Citibank, and Texaco.
There have been seven attacks on US Embassy facilities in Lima during the past three years. So far, no US employee or dependent has been killed or injured in a terrorist-related incident in Peru.
Many embassy staffers say history provides cold comfort. They say more daring tactics and newer weapons available to terrorists - plus the widespread notion among Peruvians that the nation's current economic plight is the fault of the US - have contributed to a growing perception that American diplomats in Peru may be living on borrowed time.
''So far, terrorism has been directed mostly against the government of Peru,'' says one embassy staffer. ''But we're not very far down the scale as No. 2.''
In theory, the main responsibility for protecting diplomatic missions abroad lies with the host government. But US officials say they have little confidence in Peru's inefficient, bureaucratically fragmented police forces.
To provide a main line of defense, embassy officials last year launched a major security program, starting with renovation of the 20-year-old chancery.
Located on one of Lima's busiest intersections, the US Embassy is a model of what embassies were once designed to be: open, centrally located, an accessible place for Peruvians to do business with and learn about the US.
Now, these very assets have turned into liabilities. Surrounded by city traffic and tall buildings, security officials fear the embassy could be easy prey for mobs or terrorists.
Last summer, officials began a year-long $1 million construction project to upgrade the embassy, erecting barriers to prevent car bombs, beefing up the embassy guard system, reinforcing walls, and installing bullet-resistant glass. ''By hardening our embassies, we're denying terrorists political gains. Very few targets out there have the same symbolic value that an embassy does,'' says Assistant Secretary of State Lamb.
At the same time, thousands of dollars have been spent to upgrade residences of embassy officials.
In addition, all embassy staffers and many dependents have been given training in coping with violence in personal situations.
State Department officials insist they're not out to make ''James Bonds'' of American diplomats. But a required day-long ''Coping With Violence Abroad'' seminar in Washington, combined with training at individual embassies, is designed to teach skills that until recently were taught to only US intelligence and military personnel.
Employees are taught how to frustrate surveillance by a potential kidnapper or assassin. For the most part, that means varying daily schedules and driving routes to avoid being too predictable.
There is also training in the fine points of offensive and defensive driving to elude pursuers or to break out of a roadblock.
In addition, a course in personal protection is being taught at the 30 highest-risk posts. Besides politics and protocol, the job of an FSO now also involves learning some of the basics of martial arts, plus rudimentary skills in the use of firearms and the detection of explosives. (Searching the family car for bombs is now part of the daily routine for hundreds of American diplomats around the world.)
Embassy personnel are also taught how to improve their chances of surviving as a hostage. This training includes tips on interacting with captors (follow orders; don't be confrontational; get emotions under control) and establishing routines to adapt to prolonged periods of captivity (establish regular habits; get plenty of exercise).

Graphic

 
PIcture 1, Peruvian guard keeps watchful eye on traffic outside US Embassy in Lima. PHOTOS BY CHARLES LANE; Pictures 2 through 4, The US Embassy in Lima and the ambassadors residence were originally located for easy access to the people and activities of Peru. These facilities are now being transformed into fortresses as terrorists make openness a liability. Peruvian workers reinforce Embassy wall. PHOTOS BY CHARLES LANE; Pictures 5 and 6, Foreign Service personnel and their families, representing the US around the world, have long been taught basic social graces such as how to extend traditional greetings to the citizens of a host nation. Now diplomats and their wives are also being trained to use their hands in self-defense. At the US Embassy in Kuwait, women learn how to block a blow and how, as a last resort, to strike back, PHOTOS PROVIDED BY US STATE DEPARTMENT


End of Document