US pressure on Libya strains ties with Western allies
Christian Science Monitor (Boston, MA)
April 14, 1986, Monday


Copyright 1986 The Christian Science Publishing Society
Section: International; Pg. 9
Length: 799 words
Byline: By David Winder, Staff writer of The Christian Science Monitor
Dateline: London
Highlight: US envoy in Europe not expected to gain backing for retaliatory strike
Body


Europe understands American anger over possible Libyan-inspired acts of terrorism. But that sympathy is not being translated into support for military action against Libya.
That is why Vernon Walters, the chief United States delegate to the UN, is expected to come back-empty handed from his mission to Europe to rally NATO allies behind a military option.
There is speculation in Europe that intensive US diplomatic activity by senior officials in Europe, Asia, and the Middle East, aims to force Europe to take a firm stand - such as imposing economic and diplomatic sanctions that would preempt the need for a US military strike.
General Walters met with British Prime Minister Margaret Thatcher over the weekend to seek her approval for sending US F-111 fighter jets to Libya from American airfields in Britain.
But Mrs. Thatcher, President Reagan's closest European ally, remains doubtful about the international legality of attacking Libya without full proof that it was behind recent terrorist attacks in Europe. These attacks were against a TWA passenger jet and a West Berlin discotheque frequented by US servicemen. In all, five US citizens were killed.
The prime minister's office, when asked about how to reconcile conflicting news media reports that the prime minister was both ''cool'' and ''sympathetic'' to F-111s leaving US bases, chose not to elaborate. But a spokesman for Mrs. Thatcher said, ''We believe Libya could be responsible and there is a general feeling that it was behind the Berlin attack.''
The US does not need the F-111s from Britain to accomplish any military mission in Libya, but it would strengthen President Reagan's hand if he could show he had the political support of an important European power.
After leaving London, Walters flew to Bonn and Paris before traveling to Rome today.
The French and West German stance toward Libya is even less rigorous than Britain which cut off diplomatic relations with the North African country after the Libyan shooting death of a policewoman in London in April 1984. Italy is reluctant to act against Libya, a country with which it has strong historical and economic links.
During meetings in Bonn, Chancellor Helmut Kohl's government called for prudence in any US actions in the Mediterranean, but also urged coordinated international police efforts against those suspected of terrorism.
Meanwhile, the three powers responsible for the security of West Berlin - the US, France, and Britain - said Saturday they were taking unspecified measures to control international terrorism, including the expulsion of persons ''posing a threat to the population of Berlin.''
If anything, Europe wants to dissuade the US from making any precipitous assault on Libya out of fear that could have far-reaching consequences for its members. Hence, today's emergency meeting of EC foreign ministers at The Hague. Significantly, the call for the meeting came from Mediterranean countries - Spain and Italy - which have NATO bases and which have most to fear in the event of Libyan retaliation.
Much of Europe's reluctance to approve a military solution is that it won't necessarily end terrorism, and that military action is not the answer to long-standing political problems.
At this writing, US forces were reportedly ready to take military reprisals against Libya.
There is concern within Europe that under the Reagan administration, the US is developing a propensity for military action in defiance of international law.
David Owen, leader of the Social Democratic Party and a former foreign secretary in a Labour government, said in London last week that although the US was given the excuse recently to attack Libya in the Gulf of Sidra ''it must be scrupulous in acting at all times within the framework of the United Nations Charter.'' In his view, the US should follow the example set by President Kennedy during the Cuban missile crisis, when Washington used both the UN Security Council and a formal proclamation of a naval quarantine on Cuba.
If the UN refused to take such action under the charter, there would be ''a strong justification in international law'' for the US to impose a maritime and air blockade against Libya, Dr. Owen said.
US determination to resort to possible military action is attributed to Washington's irritation with what it sees as Europe's weak response toward Libya. The US would like Europe to back up criticism of Libya with strong economic sanctions. But even Britain, which has acted more firmly than its EC partners, is opposed to sanctions.
Meanwhile, the International Airline Pilots Association, meeting in London, is expected to vote today or tomorrow on a US-sponsored resolution calling for a boycott of airports in Syria, Libya, and Iran because these nations are suspected of harboring terrorists.


End of Document