US Qualifies View of PLO Violence
Christian Science Monitor (Boston, MA)
February 14, 1989, Tuesday


Copyright 1989 The Christian Science Publishing Society
Section: THE U.S.; Pg. 7
Length: 675 words
Byline: E.A. Wayne, Staff writer of The Christian Science Monitor
Dateline: WASHINGTON
Highlight: TERRORISM
Body


THE clash between Israeli soldiers and Palestinian guerrillas Feb. 5 highlights the challenges for Washington as it tries to bring the two parties to the negotiating table.
Israel contended that the attempted Palestinian infiltration was grounds for breaking off the nascent dialogue between the United States and the Palestine Liberation Organization.
PLO chairman Yasser Arafat pledged late last year to abandon terrorism as a precondition for starting talks with the United States.
The Bush administration's response to this first test of its Mideast policy signals that it does not accept the argument that any Palestinian act of violence against Israel is terrorism.
At the same time, Secretary of State James Baker III and other US officials say Washington warned the PLO over this incident and will apply close scrutiny to keep Mr. Arafat to his word.
However, the Feb. 5 clash points up the difficulty Washington faces in classifying attacks as terrorism and in assigning responsibility, well-placed US officials say.
Officials say the US would be hard pressed to justify breaking off the US-PLO dialogue.
On Feb. 5, Israel troops killed five armed guerrillas in the buffer zone that Israel maintains in Lebanon north of the border. Those killed were identified as members of the Popular Front for the Liberation of Palestine (PFLP) and the Palestine Liberation Front (PLF), two of the most radical groups within the PLO.
Publicly and through a diplomatic channels Israel argued that this incident was grounds for ending the US-PLO dialogue.
The protest reflects the belief of Israeli Prime Minister Yitzhak Shamir and his close allies that the US-PLO dialogue is totally counterproductive, informed US diplomats say. Statements by other Israeli leaders, they add, suggest a less categorical rejection of that channel.
Nevertheless, in this specific case US officials say there is no clear evidence as to the target of the guerrilla attack.
Under the notion of terrorism which Washington uses, the target of an attack must be noncombatants. Attacks on military targets are not considered as terrorism, though they are not to be condoned, US officials say.
For example, the spectacular motorized hang-glider attack on an Israeli military post in November 1987 was not classified as a terrorist attack by Washington. On the other hand, the March 1988 hijacking by PLO guerrillas of a bus filled with civilian workers from the Dimona nuclear facility in Israel falls into the US definition of terrorism, US specialists say.
Israel, on the other hand, labels a much broader category of anti-Israeli, small-group attacks as terrorism.
In response to Israel's complaint, Washington said it would carefully review all evidence about the target or objective of the infiltrators, informed officials say.
But it also signaled that the US could not hold Arafat responsible for all violence carried out by Palestinians, nor does the US consider all such violence to be terrorism.
The US also acted on Israel's complaints. The US ambassador in Tunisia was instructed to have a special meeting with his PLO interlocutor to say that Washington could not countenance such attacks and would hold the PLO to its pledge. The US message underlined that an incident like that of Feb. 5 creates an atmosphere that endangers US-PLO talks and is counterproductive to the confidence building necessary if Israel and the PLO are ever to sit at the same table for peace talks.
The PLO says it reserves the right to carry out military attacks on Israel until a solution to the Israeli-Palestinian problem is reached.
US specialists on the region say the Feb. 5 attack was probably intended by the PFLP and the PLF as a test of Arafat's moderate line, with which those groups are not completely satisfied.
US officials expect more difficult calls like this one in the weeks and months ahead.
Not only will they have to weigh evidence about the targets of an attack, but also evidence about who carried it out, and if the culprits are identifiable, whether Arafat should be held to blame for it.

Graphic

 
Picture, PLO GUERRILLAS: How united are they behind Arafat?, R. HAIDAR/GAMMA-LIAISON


End of Document