US Subtly Warns Iraq on Terrorism
Christian Science Monitor (Boston, MA)
October 15, 1990, Monday


Copyright 1990 The Christian Science Publishing Society
Section: THE U.S.; Pg. 1
Length: 916 words
Byline: Peter Grier, Staff writer of The Christian Science Monitor
Dateline: WASHINGTON
Highlight: Message to Saddam: 'If attack takes place - whenever, wherever - we will hold you personally responsible'
Body


IN the West Wing of the White House they have no secret vision of how the Persian Gulf crisis will end. They have no special insight into Saddam Hussein's mind, say officials. They admit to no set time when military action might replace the economic sanctions now squeezing Iraq. They expect only the unexpected. And it seems the standoff is more personal to those involved than are most foreign policy crises.
If Saddam Hussein is thinking about fomenting terrorism, for instance, the White House has a message for him: ''If some terrorist act takes place, whenever, wherever, we will hold you personally responsible,'' says a senior Bush administration figure.
Asked whether this means Saddam himself would become a target, the official gives no answer. Instead, he smiles an ambiguous smile.
With the military situation apparently stable for the moment, the possibility of terrorism is one of the administration's top concerns. In recent weeks Iraq's leader has been quietly talking to the representatives of a number of terrorist organizations, and in essence seems to be mobilizing the terrorist community, United States officials say.
The killing of at least 19 rioting Palestinians by Israeli security forces in Jerusalem heightens terrorism worries. Already Palestinian terrorist Abu Abbas has threatened retaliation for the deaths at Temple Mount unless the US severs ties with Israel and resumes a dialogue with the Palestine Liberation Organization (PLO).
The Israeli government has let it be known that it will not cooperate with a United Nations mission that is to go to Jerusalem to investigate the Temple Mount incident. The mission is being sent under a United Nations Security Council resolution expressing ''alarm at the violence which took place on Oct. 8 at Haram al-Sharif and other holy places of Jerusalem.'' An aide to Prime Minister Yitzhak Shamier is reported to have said: ''We will not cooperate.''
The assassination of Egypt's parliament speaker, Rifaat el-Mahgoub, Friday in Cairo, could have been in retaliation for the Egyptian stand in the Gulf. As of this writing, no group had claimed credit for the killing.
The use of chemical weapons in a terror attack is among the scenarios the Bush administration considers possible. Officials have no specific information that Iraq is planning use of poison gas against US or European targets. But Saddam Hussein has shown a willingness to use chemicals in past operations, and considering his contacts with known terrorists, the US is simply putting two and two together.
''We've given a lot of thought to the possibility'' of chemical terrorism, says the senior administration official.
In view of the serious response that such an attack would likely generate, most US officials don't think Saddam Hussein is likely to try it. But his increasingly bellicose rhetoric is not interpreted in the White House as a sign of strength. ''It is an indication to us that the sanctions are beginning to have an effect,'' says another senior administration official.
Among Saddam Hussein's most recent threats was a renewal of his warning that he could directly attack Israel with strategic weapons. Instead of the chemical weapons he boasted about earlier this year, this time Saddam talked of a new long-range missile he called the ''Al-Hijara,'' a name meaning stone in Arabic. Clearly he was trying to evoke comparison with the stone-throwing Palestinian youths of the intifada in Israel's occupied territories. ''What a multitude of stones there are in Iraq!'' exclaimed the Iraqi leader in a statement read over Baghdad radio last week.
It is not clear whether the Al-Hijara is a new, more potent weapon, an older missile with a new name, or an idle threat. ''We're not quite sure what he's talking about,'' says the second White House source.
Iraq already has two long-range missiles capable of reaching Israel - the Al-Hussein and the Al-Abbas. Both are derived from Soviet-supplied SCUD-B missiles the range of which has been extended by enlarging fuel tanks and reducing warhead payload.  These missiles are inaccurate enough that they are only suitable for attacking city-sized targets, and their relatively small payload carries little explosive punch. Michael Eisenstadt, a military analyst at the Washington Institute for Near East Policy, concludes that during the Iran-Iraq war more damage was caused by the falling missile bodies of fired Al-Husseins than by their warheads.
Poison-gas warheads would make Iraqi missiles more fearsome weapons. US officials don't rule out the possibility that Saddam Hussein has produced chemical payloads, though they don't feel the chances are high.
So far, despite Saddam Hussein's attempts to split the alliance facing him with pan-Arabic rhetoric, the multinational opposition has held together pretty well, in the White House view. The economic sanctions effort has been relatively solid; officials claim even Iran has been more cooperative than they expected.
To help guard against cheating, the US government has pulled together a special task force, led by the Treasury Department. The monitoring capability of US intelligence allows this task force to track companies and individuals around the world that are planning sanctions-busting, claims the White House.
''There's hardly a foreign ministry in the world that hasn't had our ambassador show up at the opening of business and knock on the door and say 'I'd like to speak to you about X company or X individual,' '' says a US official.


End of Document