US still searching for a way to combat cycle of terrorism
Christian Science Monitor (Boston, MA)
January 3, 1986, Friday


Copyright 1986 The Christian Science Publishing Society
Section: National; Pg. 3
Length: 862 words
Byline: By George D. Moffett III, Staff writer of The Christian Science Monitor
Dateline: Washington
Highlight: New terrorist tactics and touchy international relations thwart efforts
Body


Following the worst year of terrorism ever, the United States is still searching for the right tools of statecraft to contain it.
Diplomatic observers say by stepping up pressure on Libya and giving the green light for Israeli retaliation, the US may be doing all that's possible in responding to the twin attacks at the Rome and Vienna airports last month that left 18 dead and over 100 injured.
But they caution that the changing tactics of terrorists - plus the difficulties involved in isolating state sponsors of international terrorism - pose major obstacles to breaking the cycle of violence.
''We're dealing with a whole new variety of terrorist,'' says terrorism expert Robert Kupperman of Georgetown University's Center for Strategic and International Studies. ''These are people willing to be totally brutal. Their actions are no longer tempered by the need to maintain a popular constituency. This is terrorism for its pure shock value.''
Last week, investigators in Europe, Israel, and the US blamed the airport killings on a dissident group led by Palestinian renegade Abu Nidal. The group, which broke with the PLO in 1972, has been implicatd in at least 20 terrorist incidents in 1985, including last month's hijacking of an Egyptian airliner in Cyprus.
In statements this week, US and Israel charged that the Libyan-based group received the direct support of Libyan leader Col. Muammar Qaddafi, and called for worldwide sanctions against Libya. In addition, the US has hinted at possible military actions against Libya, including air strikes.
In remarks reported by the official Libyan news agency JANA on Wednesday, Colonel Qaddafi warned that retaliation against Libya would lead to ''never-ending war''in the Mediterranean, terminating trade, shipping, and airline traffic in the region. Qaddafi cautioned that if Palestinians are attacked in Libya, ''then we will chase Americans in the streets of America and the Israelis in the streets of occupied Palestine.''
Experts say there's no easy answer to dealing with Libyan-backed terrorism. For one thing, military action against Libya - presumably air strikes from carrier-based planes in the Mediterranean - would be far from risk free. Military experts say attacking US planes would almost certainly encounter heavy anti-aircraft fire and resistance from Soviet-built Libyan jets.
For another thing, efforts to isolate Libya diplomatically and economically could prove as difficult now as in the past. Since 1981, when Qaddafi threatened to dispatch assassination teams to murder high-level American officials, the US has complemented calls for concerted European action against Libya with its own punative measures, including a 1982 embargo on imports of Libyan oil.
But while the recent airport incidents have clearly galvanized anti-Libyan sentiments in Europe, economic and security considerations could still work to thwart the kind of coordinated diplomatic action the US is once again seeking. Key US allies such as Italy and West Germany are known to be reluctant to jeopardize trade ties with Libya, including access to Libyan oil. Many European leaders, eager to avoid increased terrorist attacks, also worry about the political risks of alienating Qaddafi.
Beyond the issue of dealing with Libya's sponsorship of terrorism, experts say the emergence of younger, more fanatical Palestinian terrorist groups - operating with logistical support from a European-based network of Palestinian and European backers - make uprooting terrorism more difficult than ever before.
''What we're seeing is Abu Nidal in action,'' says Mr. Kupperman, the terrorism expert. ''It's a reflection of the factionalism that's arisen as (PLO chairman Yasser) Arafat has lost control.''
Finally, there remains the by now familiar dilemma of reconciling responses to terrorism with other foreign policy priorities. On one hand, Reagan officials fear the toll taken on the delicate Middle East peace process by the continuing pattern of terrorism and retaliation. On the other hand, they wish to make it clear that acts of terrorism, like the twin attacks in Rome and Vienna, will not be tolerated.
Observers here say this continuing dilemma may be one reason administration spokesmen backed down from their initial response to the airport incidents. In a veiled warning to Israel the day after the attacks, Presidential press spokesman Larry Speakes urged all parties in the Middle East conflict to show restraint in reacting to the events. A day later, other Reagan officials sanctioned Israeli retaliation, so long as it was directed specifically at those responsible for the attacks.
A similar mixed response followed last October's Israeli air attack on PLO headquarters near Tunis, launched in response to the killing of three Israelis in Cyprus. In his initial comments, President Reagan called the raid ''legitimate.'' A day later, the US backed away, calling the raid ''understandable as an expression of self-defense'' but warned that the bombing ''cannot be condoned.''
Observers say the shift in emphasis reflects the difficult trade-offs involved in combating terrorism while seeking to nudge the peace process forward.


End of Document