US to use Facebook, Twitter to issue terror alerts
The Bismarck Tribune
April 8, 2011 Friday


Copyright 2011 The Bismarck Tribune, a division of Lee Enterprises All Rights Reserved
Section: WIRE; Pg. 2A
Length: 329 words
Byline: EILEEN SULLIVAN Associated Press
Body


WASHINGTON - Terror alerts from the government will soon have just two levels of warnings - elevated and imminent - and those will be relayed to the public only under certain circumstances. Color codes are out; Facebook and Twitter will sometimes be in, according to a Homeland Security draft obtained by The Associated Press.
Some terror warnings could be withheld from the public if announcing a threat would risk exposing an intelligence operation or an ongoing investigation, according to the government's confidential plan.
Like a gallon of milk, the new terror warnings will each come with a stamped expiration date.
The new system, replacing the five color-coded levels, is expected to be in place by April 27.
A 19-page document, marked "for official use only" and dated April 1, describes the step-by-step process that would occur behind the scenes when the government believes terrorists might be threatening Americans. It describes the sequence of notifying members of Congress, then counterterrorism officials in states and cities, then governors and mayors and, ultimately, the public.
It even specifies details about how many minutes U.S. officials can wait before organizing urgent conference calls to discuss pending threats. It places the Homeland Security secretary, currently Janet Napolitano, in charge of the National Terrorism Advisory System.
The new terror alerts would also be published online using Facebook and Twitter "when appropriate," the plan said, but only after federal, state and local leaders have been notified.
The government has struggled with how much information to share with the public about specific threats, sometimes over concern about revealing classified intelligence or law enforcement efforts to disrupt an unfolding plot. But the color warnings that became one of the government's most visible anti-terrorism programs since the September 2001 attacks were criticized as too vague to be useful and were sometimes mocked by TV comedians.

Load-Date: April 8, 2011


End of Document