US to reassert terrorism policy with Syria sanctions
Christian Science Monitor (Boston, MA)
November 14, 1986, Friday


Copyright 1986 The Christian Science Publishing Society
Section: National; Pg. 3
Length: 638 words
Byline: By George D. Moffett III, Staff writer of The Christian Science Monitor
Dateline: Washington
Highlight: Anxious to take a tough stance against terrorism after the embarrassing disclosures of its arms-for-hostages deals with Iran, the Reagan administration appears to be close to invoking economic and political sanctions against Syria for its backing of terrorists.
Body


Smarting from disclosures that it sent arms to Iran to secure the release of American hostages in Lebanon, the Reagan administration is trying to reemphasize its tough stand against terrorism with a proposed package of economic and political sanctions against Syria.
The sanctions, which as of this writing had not been formally announced by the White House, are likely to be more cosmetic than punitive, some terrorism experts say. But their very existence shows that, in its relations with Damascus, the administration is trying to walk a fine line between public toughness and private flexibility.
''The administration is trying to divert attention from Iran to Syria and get its antiterrorism policy back on track,'' says Robert Kupperman, a terrorism expert at the Center for Strategic and International Studies. Mr. Kupperman was responding to reports that the United States was about to invoke sanctions to punish Syria for its role in the attempted sabatoge of an Israeli airliner last summer.
The administration's antiterrorism policy was dealt a major setback last week by reports that over the past 14 months the Reagan administration secretly negotiated the release of three US hostages held by pro-Iranian groups in Lebanon in return for shipments of US military equipment and spare parts.
The news provoked charges that the administration was backing away from its longstanding refusal to negotiate with terrorists, and its stated policy of neutrality regarding the Iran-Iraq war.
Breaking a week-long silence on the subject, President Reagan acknowledged to congressional leaders Wednesday that the US has provided military supplies to Iran. The President said the shipments were part of a US effort to shore up moderate elements in the Iranian government.
The expected new sanctions will stop short of an outright diplomatic break with Syria. But measures now awaiting President Reagan's final approval call for cuts in the size of the Syrian embassy in Washington.
According to news reports, the US also will prohibit American oil companies from expanding investments in Syria, bar credits for the import of Syrian goods, and prohibit the export of computers and spare parts used by Syrian airlines.
In addition, the US is expected to delay indefinitely the return of US ambassador to Syria William L. Eagleton, who was recalled three weeks ago as a show of solidarity with Britain. Britain broke relations with Syria after the Damascus government was implicated in an abortive plot of a Jordanian national, Nezar Hindawi, to blow up an Israeli airliner leaving London earlier this year. Mr. Hindawi was convicted of the attempted terrorism in a British court last month.
Syria is one of five countries on a US list of countries that sponsor terrorism. The Damascus government has been accused of backing the bombings of the US Embassy and Marine Corps barracks in Lebanon in 1983 and last December's airport bombings in Rome and Vienna.
Even so, until now the US has sidestepped strong measures against Damascus because of Syria's presumed influence with radical Shiite Muslim groups in Lebanon holding US and French citizens hostage.
But a State Department official said yesterday that by leaving ''no doubt of Syria's role as a sponsor of international terrorism,'' the Hindawi affair forced the administration's hand on the matter of sanctions against Syria.
Analysts say the decision not to follow Britain's lead in actually severing relations with Syria signals the recognition in Washington that Damascus is still central to prospects for an eventual Middle East peace settlement. Experts generally agree that a comprehensive Mideast peace cannot be realized without Syria's acquiescence.
US sanctions follow the adoption Monday of milder measures, including a ban on new arms sales to Syria, by the European Community.


End of Document