US: Iran still top state terror sponsor; global attacks down
St. Louis Post-Dispatch (Missouri)
July 20, 2017 Thursday
FINAL EDITION


Copyright 2017 St. Louis Post-Dispatch, Inc. All Rights Reserved
Section: NEWS; Pg. A16
Length: 510 words
Byline:  By MATTHEW LEE Associated Press  
Body


WASHINGTON - Iran continues to be the world's leading state sponsor of terrorism, the administration of President Donald Trump said Wednesday in a new report .
In its annual "Country Reports on Terrorism" released Wednesday, the State Department said Iran was the world's "foremost" state sponsor of terrorism in 2016, a dubious distinction the country has held for many years. It said Iran was firm in its backing of anti-Israel groups as well as proxies that have destabilized already devastating conflicts in Iraq, Syria and Yemen. It also said Iran continued to recruit in Afghanistan and Pakistan for Shiite militia members to fight in Syria and Iraq.
In terms of nonstate actors, the report said the Islamic State group was responsible for more attacks and deaths than any other group in 2016, and was seeking to widen its operations particularly as it lost territory in Iraq and Syria. It carried out 20 percent more attacks in Iraq in 2016 compared with 2015, and its affiliates struck in more than 20 countries, according to the report.
Iran has been designated a "state sponsor of terrorism" by the State Department and subjected to a variety of U.S. sanctions since 1984, and many of the activities outlined in the report are identical to those detailed in previous reports. But, this year's finding comes as the Trump administration moves to toughen its stance against Iran.
Trump has been particularly critical of the Iran nuclear deal negotiated by the Barack Obama administration and only reluctantly certified this week that Iran remained entitled to some sanctions relief under its provisions.
"Iran remained the foremost state sponsor of terrorism in 2016 as groups supported by Iran maintained their capability to threaten U.S. interests and allies," said the report, the Trump administration's first, which was released just a day after the administration slapped new sanctions on Iran for ballistic missile activity. Some of those sanctions were imposed on people and companies affiliated with Iran's Revolutionary Guard Corps, which the report said continues to play "a destabilizing role in military conflicts in Iraq, Syria and Yemen."
Iran used a unit of the IRGC, the Qods Force, "to implement foreign policy goals, provide cover for intelligence operations and create instability in the Middle East," the report said. It added that Iran has publicly acknowledged its involvement in Syria and Iraq.
Hezbollah worked closely with Iran to support the attempt by Syrian President Bashar Assad's government to maintain and control territory, according to the report. And with Iranian support, Hezbollah continued to develop "long-term attack capabilities and infrastructure around the world," it said.
The report also accused Iran of supplying weapons, money and training to militant Shia groups in Bahrain, maintaining a "robust" cyberterrorism program and refusing to identify or prosecute senior members of the al-Qaida network that it has detained.
As in previous reports, Sudan and Syria were also identified as "state sponsors of terrorism."

Load-Date: July 21, 2017


End of Document