USA blacklists roaming Iranian oil tanker in Mediterranean
Stillman Advance: Stillman College
September 2, 2019 Monday


University Wire
Copyright 2019 UWIRE via U-Wire All Rights Reserved
Section: WORLD NEWS; Pg. 1
Length: 514 words
Byline: Steven Clarke
Body


Despite Washington's efforts to keep it detained, it was released by the British territory and its every move is being followed with intense speculation.
Iran's economy has suffered under the sanctions, which target its oil and financial sectors.
Formerly called the Grace 1, this ship was seized by the British in Gibraltar in July on suspicion it was carrying crude for meant for Syria in violation of European Union sanctions, in a development that had received widespread media attentions coming as it did amidst escalating US-Iran tensions. "It was a big mistake to trust Zarif", Pompeo said in a Twitter post, adding that Iranian Foreign Minister Mohammad Javad Zarif earlier "guaranteed to the United Kingdom that the IRGC oil tanker Grace1 / AdrianDarya1 would not head to Syria.".
Both the ship and Kumar were designated under a USA order that "targets terrorists and those providing support to terrorism or acts of terrorism". The vessel was in waters north of Cyprus as of early Saturday, according to the MarineTraffic website.
He said vessels like the Adrian Darya 1, allow Iran to "transfer large volumes of oil, which they attempt to mask and sell illicitly to fund the regime's malign activities".
The ship still does not list a destination for its 2.1 million barrels of oil, worth some $130 million. The ship's Automatic Identification System does not show its destination after its mariners onboard previously listed it as ports in Greece and Turkey.
Its initial seizure sparked a diplomatic crisis between the United Kingdom and Iran, which saw Iran seize a British-flagged and Swedish-owned oil tanker, the Stena Impero, in the Gulf.
'I don't know who that is,' says Serena on banned umpire Ramos
But yeah, exactly. "Later in the sets I was able to take advantage in the big moments and move on and that's what's important". After the match, she was asked for her thoughts on Ramos being kept off her matches - and she gave a stunning response.
But Turkish Foreign Minister Mevlut Cavusoglu said on Friday that the tanker had changed course several times and insisted that it was heading for Lebanese waters instead.
Authorities in Gibraltar alleged the ship was bound for a refinery in Baniyas, Syria, when they seized it in early July. Boustani also said Lebanon does not have a refinery to deal with crude oil.
Syrian President Bashar Assad's adviser Bouthaina Shaaban separately told the Lebanon-based Al-Mayadeen TV that Damascus is trying to get oil that its people need "but authorities don't know where the Iranian tanker is heading".
Spain revealed that the tanker was captured upon order by the United States.
Iran sold the oil which was on the detained tanker to a mystery buyer after it was released by Gibraltar earlier this month.
Tensions between Iran and the USA have soared ever since Washington stepped up its campaign of "maximum pressure" against Tehran and reimposed sanctions after leaving the landmark 2015 nuclear deal past year.
'The destination is determined by the owner of the oil, ' the Iranian government spokesman said, according to state television.

Load-Date: September 3, 2019


End of Document