USA is able to fight Iraq, terrorism at the same time
USA TODAY
October 24, 2002, Thursday,
FINAL EDITION


Copyright 2002 Gannett Company, Inc.
Section: NEWS;; DEBATE
Length: 601 words
Body

USA TODAY and other media analysts seem to question the ability of the Bush administration to depose Iraq's Saddam Hussein while effectively fighting the war against global terrorism ("Iraq war plans distract from needed focus on terrorism," Our View, War on terrorism debate, Tuesday).
How can these two things not be different sides of the same coin, as President Bush has stated?
Eliminating the current Iraqi regime is an integral part of the war on terror, because Saddam is a terrorist with the tools of a modern, prosperous state at his disposal. The Iraqi leader's past behavior speaks for itself.
Also, why would the European countries currently backing the war on international terrorism stop that support in the wake of a U.S. attack on and invasion of Iraq?
Are the Europeans not now engaged in this struggle to protect their interests? I disagree with the argument that the Europeans are rooting out terror cells and cutting off financial sources only to support the United States. Al-Qaeda and other global terrorists are just as likely to attack French, German, Spanish and other European interests as they are to attack those of the United States.
I think we should have a little more faith in the Bush administration's ability to "walk and chew gum" at the same time.
Darryl Keith Woolfolk
Grosswallstadt, Germany
Iraq issue election-driven
USA TODAY's editorial on the Bush administration's Iraq policy, though factually correct, does not probe into the motivation of President Bush in insisting that Iraq is suddenly a priority.
As we see it in India, Bush needs a military success for the upcoming elections -- a success he seems to believe will not come from his anti-terrorism war alone. So he hopes to find in Iraq a soft, sitting target that he can carpet-bomb to the glee of the media, especially television.
I consider this unethical and unbecoming of a superpower such as the United States. Instead, the U.S. should take steps to control the terrorist activity that is spreading its tentacles all over Asia and will soon overflow into Europe and America itself.
These steps might not be as spectacular on television screens as a war with Iraq, but they would definitely make this world a safer place. What happened on Sept. 11, 2001, was just a foretaste of things to come.
Also, in its war against terrorism, the U.S. needs to look beyond its nose. It cannot win this war by arguing that the people it considers to be terrorists are more important than those other countries regard as being dangerous. An example is the terrorism affecting India, which has been exported by America's ally, Pakistan.
Khurshed Pastakia
Mumbai, India
Bush 'courageous' on Saddam
President Bush should be applauded for taking a courageous stand against Saddam Hussein's outlaw regime and its reckless pursuit of weapons of mass destruction ("USA ready on several fronts," Opposing View, War on terrorism debate, Tuesday).
As Bush noted in his most recent address to the nation, the riskiest option for dealing with Iraq is to do nothing. In fact, inaction would only give Saddam time to complete his malicious pursuit of nuclear weapons -- and would embolden tyrants and terrorists everywhere ("Bush: U.S. can't await 'final proof.' Calls for resolve to stop Saddam," News, Oct. 8).
Acting now to disarm Saddam, using military force if necessary, is the only way we will keep America safe from weapons of mass destruction that may fall into the hands of terrorists and other enemies of freedom.
Bush is right: Our nation cannot let world events be dictated by brutal and lawless dictators.
Michael Madigan
Mishawaka, Ind.

Graphic

 
PHOTO, B/W, Kathy Willens, AP; Anti-war: Members of the No Blood for Oil coalition, which opposes an Iraq invasion, protest Monday in front of the U.S. Mission to the United Nations in New York. The protesters were arrested, as were 13 others inside the building.

Load-Date: October 24, 2002


End of Document