USA service member killed in Afghanistan attack, Taliban claims responsibility
Stillman Advance: Stillman College
December 23, 2019 Monday


University Wire
Copyright 2019 UWIRE via U-Wire All Rights Reserved
Section: WORLD NEWS; Pg. 1
Length: 422 words
Byline: Steven Clarke
Body


In return, USA and North Atlantic Treaty Organisation force would commit a "conditions-based" withdrawal of their troops from Afghanistan. The Taliban also claimed responsibility for that crash, a claim the US military dismissed as false.
A spokesman for the Taliban, Zabihullah Mujahid, said the American was killed in the northern province of Kunduz where a joint US-Afghan military force was carrying out a raid.
The US military early Monday confirmed that a service member was killed in action.
The killing is likely to have consequences for ongoing talks between the U.S. and the Taliban. The insurgents hotly contest many districts in Kunduz, which has twice briefly fallen to the Taliban in recent years.
The armed group further claimed that another United States soldier and an Afghan commando were also wounded in the incident.
Monday's death brings to 20 the number of Americans killed in Afghanistan so far this year, which has been the deadliest for USA forces since the end of major combat operations in the country in December 2014.
LeBron James doubtful vs. Nuggets; not load management, sources say
The Lakers can't afford to have Davis go down at the same time as James with a Christmas game against the Clippers looming. The Lakers are now 24-5, first in the Western Conference, but have lost back-to-back games for the first time all season.
The US now has about 12,000 troops in Afghanistan engaged in training, advising and assisting Afghan security forces and performing counter-terrorism operations.
"We have a mission in Afghanistan, that is to ensure that it never again becomes a safe haven for terrorists", Esper told a Pentagon news conference. Trump has said he wants to cut that number to about 8,600 or lower as he seeks to show voters he is making good on a campaign pledge to end America's longest war. Trump said at the time that Taliban leaders were to travel to the USA for secret peace talks, but after the attack he said the meetings were "dead" and called off the negotiations.
As part of the negotiations, the U.S. wants the insurgent group to guarantee that they would not allow any terrorist group to use Afghanistan as a base for its operations.
But some members of Trump's own Republican party, including close confidant Senator Lindsey Graham, say the idea of the Taliban conducting counter-terrorism operations is risible.
The attack comes one day after officials announced preliminary results in Afghanistan's presidential elections that put President Ashraf Ghani on track to secure a second term.

Load-Date: December 23, 2019


End of Document