USA funding for Palestinians ends, raising security fears
Stillman Advance: Stillman College
February 3, 2019 Sunday


University Wire
Copyright 2019 UWIRE via U-Wire All Rights Reserved
Section: WORLD-NEWS; Pg. 1
Length: 438 words
Byline: Steven Clarke
Body


It remains unclear how long the cessation will last.
The U.S. Agency for International Development has ceased all assistance to Palestinians in the West Bank and Gaza, a U.S. official said. "So has US security assistance to the Palestinian Authority", according to a USA official familiar with the matter who was not authorized to speak publicly about the issue.
Turkey has observers in the Norway-led team tasked with promoting security for Palestinians in Hebron, which is holy to both Muslims and Jews and has been a flashpoint in the Israeli-Palestinian conflict.
Palestinian official Saeb Erekat said the United Nations should "guarantee the safety and protection of the people of Palestine" until "the end of Israel's belligerent occupation". Funding from the Pentagon would not be subject to the same conditions of the anti-terrorism law.
The CIA is also believed to give funding to Palestinian intelligence officials, which is expected to continue.
BP bows to climate pressure from shareholders
The company would also have to evaluate whether each new material capital investment is consistent with the climate agreement. We are determined to advance the energy transition while also growing shareholder value, ' said Helge Lund, BP's chairman.
The Anti-Terrorism Clarification Act , passed by Congress and then signed into law by President Donald Trump past year, has just come into force. The move will also see the end of some 60-million dollars in aid for Palestinian security forces. "A security force can't survive without equipment and training.it's a death sentence".
"At the request of the Palestinian Authority, we have wound down certain projects and programs funded with assistance under the authorities specified in ATCA in the West Bank and Gaza", aUnited States official told Reuters on Friday, referring to a decision linked to a 31 January deadline set by new usa legislation under which foreign aid recipients would be more exposed to anti-terrorism lawsuits.
Palestinian officials also criticized the cuts, prompting sharp responses from Jason Greenblatt, an assistant to President Trump and special representative for worldwide negotiations.
Over the past year, the USA has slashed $300 million for Palestinian refugees and more than $200 million for humanitarian assistance, economic projects, medical aid and peace-building activities for Palestinians.
In the village of al-Mughayyir, hundreds of demonstrators waving Palestinian flags rallied, hurling stones at Israeli forces and burning tires. The official added that no steps have been taken to close the US AID mission in the occupied Palestinian territories.

Load-Date: February 3, 2019


End of Document