USA must accept terrorism threat, Bush says
USA TODAY
July 5, 2002, Friday,
FINAL EDITION


Copyright 2002 Gannett Company, Inc.
Section: NEWS;
Length: 535 words
Byline: Judy Keen
Dateline: RIPLEY, W.Va.
Body

RIPLEY, W.Va. -- Americans must accept the threat of terrorism and not allow it to prevent them from "celebrating our freedom," President Bush said Thursday.
In a telephone interview, he said he knows that many people felt anxious about their safety on Independence Day. "It's a sign that we're in war," he said. "After all, we're fighting people who hate our freedom. And as we celebrate freedom, we should be worried that they would want to attack us."
But he said his morning intelligence briefings did not include any new, specific threats about terror attacks on the July Fourth holiday.
Bush said he felt "very comfortable going into the hinterland" for his speech in this tiny town, where he spoke to a flag-waving crowd of several thousand people. "I felt very safe," he said.
"People need to celebrate freedom and . . .  go about their business knowing full well that our government is doing everything we can to protect them," he said.
"I feel especially proud this Fourth of July because our nation is so strong and so united," he said.
Bush also said:
 * He's looking forward to his 56th birthday Saturday. The stresses of the past year have not aged him, he said. "I feel young enough to run sub-seven-minute miles, let's put it that way."
His parents, former president George Bush and former first lady Barbara Bush, and other relatives will join him at the family compound in Kennebunkport, Maine. "I can get a lot of rest and relaxation and laughs and really kind of unwind," he said.
 * He'll call for tougher measures to regulate corporate behavior in a speech Tuesday in New York. Bush said he will ask "corporate America to be responsible and to take care of shareholders and employees. Most corporate executives do just that. It's the few that have created a lack of confidence, and we're going to deal with them."
Bush's own conduct as a businessman has been questioned in the wake of admissions of accounting misdeeds by WorldCom, Enron and other companies. On Wednesday, White House spokesman Ari Fleischer blamed a "mix-up" by lawyers for Bush's 34-week delay in filing reports to the Securities and Exchange Commission about a controversial 1990 stock trade.
 * He's not concerned about catching Osama bin Laden before the one-year anniversary of the Sept. 11 attacks. He acknowledged that news coverage of the anniversary will raise questions about why bin Laden has not been nabbed. "I don't (worry) at all. We don't know whether bin Laden is alive or dead. But I know this: that we're on the winning side," he said.
Before his speech, Bush led the crowd gathered in front of the Jackson County Courthouse in the Pledge of Allegiance.
Last week, a federal court said reciting the Pledge in public school is unconstitutional because it includes the words "under God." The crowd shouted those two words as they recited the Pledge. "No authority of government can ever prevent an American from pledging allegiance to this one nation under God," Bush told them.
The president announced he had signed an executive order giving expedited citizenship to foreign-born members of the U.S. military serving in active duty. It makes 15,000 military personnel immediately eligible instead of waiting three years.

Graphic

 
PHOTO, B/W, Larry Downing, Reuters; Reciting Pledge: President Bush at courthouse in Ripley, W.Va.

Load-Date: July 5, 2002


End of Document