USA to counter China, Russia influence in Africa: Bolton
Stillman Advance: Stillman College
December 14, 2018 Friday


University Wire
Copyright 2018 UWIRE via U-Wire All Rights Reserved
Section: WORLD-NEWS; Pg. 1
Length: 601 words
Byline: Steven Clarke
Body


The strategy struck an "America First" tone, a cornerstone of the administration, and Bolton promised that every decision, policy and dollar of aid "will further USA priorities in the region".
The Trump administration unveiled a new Africa strategy based on "America First" principles, focused on enhancing trade ties, combating terrorism and cutting back on aid programs the administration deems inefficient.
"The United States will no longer provide indiscriminate assistance across the entire continent, without focus or prioritization", Bolton, a former U.N. ambassador, said in a speech at The Heritage Foundation in Washington, D.C. "Its investment ventures are riddled with corruption, and do not meet the same environmental or ethical standards as USA development projects", Bolton said. The U.S. has provided more than $8 billion in aid to Africa in each of the past two fiscal years. They have not stopped the scourge of terrorism, radicalism, and violence.
Both President Trump and outgoing U.N. Ambassador Nikki Haley have said that the US will not be contributing more than 25 percent to the peacekeeping budget next year - a budget the administration has pushed to decrease. He also said he was personally reviewing presidential travel recommendations from his team and expected to have announcements on foreign travel early next year.
Bolton said China is using big loans and opaque agreements to make Africa "captive to Beijing's wishes and demands".
National security adviser John Bolton unveiled President Donald Trump's Africa strategy on Thursday, outlining a plan that he said focuses heavily on countering China and Russia's expanding influence across the region, while also making sure U.S. taxpayer dollars are spent responsibly with a reduction in USA involvement in United Nations peacekeeping missions. "Its investment ventures are riddled with corruption".
Russia, for its part, is also seeking to increase its influence in the region through corrupt economic dealings.
Detention Of 2 Canadians Raises Stakes In China-U.S.-Canada Dispute
USA regulators planned to bar it from receiving US components that it depended on, effectively a corporate death sentence. He gained fame for helping arrange a visit to North Korea by former National Basketball Association player Dennis Rodman.
Although Devermont and other experts told a Senate panel on Wednesday that China has emerged as the top USA competitor in Africa, Beijing is not the only American adversary with a presence on the continent.
In subsequent remarks to reporters, Bolton said China's so-called "debt diplomacy", which begins with attractively financed projects before becoming mired in "onerous" terms and conditions, amounts to a "bait and switch" tactic of which developing countries have grown increasingly wary.
"Our objective is to resolve conflicts, not freeze them in perpetuity", he said at the Heritage Foundation, a conservative think tank.
But Bolton in particular focused on making US investment in the continent worthwhile, and was critical of the status quo.
Bolton also promised continued US support to fight ISIS, al-Qaida and their affiliates on the continent. He said that the State Department and USAID spent about $8.7 billion in 2017 in development, security and aid to Africa, but that decades of USA investment had not stopped Islamic terrorism, gains from China and Russian Federation, or encouraged regional development.
According to Bolton, Libya continues to serve as a "fertile ground" for the local Islamic State (ISIS/ISIL) affiliate "to recruit new terrorists and plot attacks against the United States".

Load-Date: December 14, 2018


End of Document