Use Vigilance To Combat Fear Of Terrorism
The Tampa Tribune (Florida)
March 19, 2003, Wednesday,
FINAL EDITION


Copyright 2003 The Tribune Co. Publishes The Tampa Tribune
Section: METRO,
Length: 546 words
Byline: KEITH MORELLI, kmorelli@tampatrib.com; Your Safety appears weekly. If you have an idea or comment, call reporter Keith Morelli at (813) 259-7698.  
Body


TAMPA - As the nation's military forces brace for what appears to be a certain war in the Middle East, it's not entirely quiet on the Western Front.
The Western Front, of course, is the U.S. homeland.
Federal, state and local officials say that if U.S. troops invade Iraq in the weeks or days ahead, there could be a backlash of terrorism and it could happen here.
Though Tampa is not as big as New York or Los Angeles or as high profile as Washington, it is home to Central Command at MacDill Air Force Base and a bustling port city that could attract the interest of terrorists bent on making a horrific statement.
In addition, Sami Al-Arian, a former University of South Florida computer science professor, sits in a Hillsborough County jail, accused by federal prosecutors of being a major player in financing Palestinian terrorists.
But the situation isn't cause for panic. People should go about their lives and not live in fear, said Florida Department of Law Enforcement spokesman Rick Morera, who also speaks for the Tampa Bay Regional Domestic Task Force.
The task force hasn't seen a trend in terrorist activity in the area, and Morera said a backlash here is unlikely. But that doesn't mean anyone should let their guard down, he said.
Be Aware, Very Aware
"We would tell the people to be vigilant and be aware of their surroundings," he said. He advises people not to shut themselves in or stop doing what they do, but they should keep their eyes open.
Typically, the number of calls about suspicious terrorist activity "goes up whenever there is a significant event, like the threat of war," he said.
He said the task force expects more calls if U.S. troops enter Iraq.
The local Crime Stoppers tip line has received a flurry of terrorism- related tips during the past couple of months, said Crime Stoppers coordinator Lisa Haber.
The tip line usually is reserved for tips about criminals, but in December, callers got into the terrorist-tattling business, Haber said.
In December, the nonprofit tip line began advertising its number on HARTline buses seeking anonymous calls about possible terrorist activity in the Tampa Bay area. Since then, the line has received a dozen such calls, Haber said. Four proved unfounded. The rest are passed on to the task force for investigation, she said.
Credible calls are investigated, she said. Most of the time, the information gathered is put into intelligence files. Sometimes, the information is turned over to the Immigration and Naturalization Service, Haber said.
She said she was not aware of any suspected terrorists arrested based on a Crime Stoppers tip.
Whom To Call
People who want to report suspicious activity can call the Crime Stoppers tip line. The number, 1-800-873-8477, is a local clearinghouse for tips on suspected terrorists, Haber said.
Calls such as, "I saw a Middle Eastern man walk into a store," or "There's a Pakistani who runs the corner shop," aren't tips, she said.
Real suspicious activity should be reported, she said, and tipsters should try to be as specific as possible. Jot down automobile tag numbers or home addresses of suspicious people.
If you think a company has terrorist links, get the name and address before calling the tip line, she said.
The more specific the information, the better, she said.

Notes

YOUR SAFETY

Load-Date: March 20, 2003


End of Document