Use of state secrets privilege affects court case
Charleston Gazette (West Virginia)
March 6, 2005, Sunday


Copyright 2005 Charleston Newspapers
Section: News; Pg. P3A
Length: 1120 words
Byline: Andrew Zajac Chicago Tribune
Body


WASHINGTON - The Bush administration is aggressively wielding a rarely used executive power known as the state secrets privilege in an attempt to squash hard-hitting court challenges to its anti-terrorism campaign.
How the White House is using this privilege, not a law but a series of legal precedents built on national security, disturbs some civil libertarians and open-government advocates because of its sweeping power. Judges almost never challenge the government's assertion of the privilege, and it can be fatal to a plaintiff's case.
The government is invoking the privilege in an attempt to wipe out the heart of a lawsuit that seeks to examine rendition, the secretive and controversial practice of sending terror suspects to foreign countries where they might be tortured.
Use of the secrets privilege also could eliminate a suit by a former FBI contract linguist who charges that the bureau bungled translations of terrorism intelligence before and after the Sept. 11, 2001, attacks.
The Bush administration is also using the secrets privilege to seek dismissal of a third case not related directly to terrorism. And the administration has invoked the privilege in less sweeping ways on several other occasions.
The use of the state secrets privilege, critics say, is part of President Bush's forceful expansion of presidential secrecy, including a more restrictive approach to releasing documents under the Freedom of Information Act; limitations on the dissemination of presidential papers and curtailment of information on individuals rounded up in the war on terrorism.
The secrets privilege is an especially powerful weapon because federal judges, reluctant to challenge the executive branch on national security, almost never refuse the government's claim to confidentiality.
That is true even though a growing body of declassified documents suggests that in the past, at least, the privilege has been used to protect presidential power, not national secrets, according to Thomas Blanton, director of the National Security Archive at the George Washington University, which works to expand public access to government documents.
There's even fresh evidence that the case leading to the Supreme Court's Reynolds decision, which enshrined the secrets privilege more than 50 years ago, may have been based more on concealing negligence than preserving national security.
In claiming the state secrets privilege, "the government always overreaches," Blanton said. "It always misleads and in some cases it lies, because it believes its authority is at stake."
That's not so, said Shannen Coffin, who oversaw state secrets litigation at the Justice Department from January 2002 until mid-2004.
"I don't think that's even a remotely plausible claim," said Coffin, now in private practice. "It's an extremely important privilege and one the government takes extremely seriously."
According to a recent study, the United States has successfully asserted the secrets privilege at least 60 times since the early 1950s, and has been stymied only five times.
Unlike criminal prosecutions, where the law allows the disclosure of at least some secret information - for example, by allowing lawyers to view it in a restricted setting such as a judge's chambers - the secrets privilege keeps information completely out of court in civil cases.
More striking than the number of cases is the breadth of some recent demands for secrecy, say lawyers familiar with government secrets litigation.
For example, it would erase most of Maher Arar's suit over his seizure by U.S. officials in New York in 2002.
Arar, a Canadian citizen who was born in Syria, said he was shackled and flown to Jordan and then Syria where he was abused and imprisoned for 10 months.
His case is aimed at laying bare the arrangements between governments that underpin renditions, said David Cole, a professor at Georgetown University and one of Arar's lawyers.
If the government succeeds "in invoking state secrets, they will make renditions immune from legal challenge in court," Cole said.
According to his suit, filed in New York in January 2004, Arar was detained at New York's Kennedy International Airport and interrogated about his links to terrorists, based apparently on his casual association with a terrorist suspect.
Arar said he pleaded with his captors to send him back to Canada. Instead he was flown to Jordan and then to Syria, where, he said, he was beaten with an electric cable and otherwise brutalized over the next 10 months.
Although the United States lists Syria as one of six state sponsors of terrorism, the two countries have cooperated from time to time in the war on terrorism.
In October 2003, Arar was released and sent back to Canada. No country has charged him with a crime. "The only conclusion is they sent me there to be tortured and to extract information," he said.
Arar's suit in American courts charges the United States with violating his civil, constitutional and human rights.
In January the government filed papers asserting that disclosure of information to defend itself "would pose an exceptionally grave or serious risk to diplomatic relations and national security" and seeking dismissal of much of the suit. The district court has yet to rule.
"What's being done in the name of the American people is not acceptable," Arar said. "I want judges to re-evaluate the post-9/11 strategy."
In a federal appeals court in Philadelphia, meanwhile, Patricia Reynolds Herring wants judges to re-evaluate a suit she filed more than five decades ago that became the modern anchor for the state secrets privilege.
In that case, the Supreme Court ruled that national security trumped grievances of citizens. It declared that the executive branch could assert a secrets privilege when "there is a reasonable danger that compulsion of the evidence will expose military matters which … should not be divulged."
The ruling meant that the Air Force did not have to produce an accident report on a 1948 crash of a B-29 testing secret electronic equipment. Herring's first husband, Robert Reynolds, was one of three civilian engineers killed.
The current challenge began in 2003, after Herring and other plaintiffs' relatives obtained a copy of the accident report from a Web site. They discovered that the engine fire that caused the plane to go down was linked to shoddy maintenance.
The new suit alleges the government committed fraud by citing national security in refusing to release the report. The government counters that decisions made 50 years ago shouldn't be second-guessed because it's impossible "to understand how seemingly trivial information contained in these documents may have provided valuable intelligence to the nation's enemies."

Load-Date: March 7, 2005


End of Document