Utahns get a primer on security
Deseret News (Salt Lake City)
March 26, 2000, Sunday


Copyright 2000 The Deseret News Publishing Co.
Section: LOCAL;
Length: 722 words
Byline: By Jennifer DobnerDeseret News staff writer
Body


Like underclassmen given tips and trade secrets from those a few grades ahead, members of Utah's Olympic Public Safety Command have been getting valuable advice about their specialty -- security -- during a visit to Sydney, home of the 2000 Summer Games.
Among the lessons: officer training, venue staffing and accreditation, transportation -- and terrorism.
"It's been quite valuable," Craig Dearden, command director and Utah Department of Public Safety commissioner, said by telephone from Australia, where he and other Utahns have been attending a conference on such subjects. "We're looking at some of their plans and will bring back some information about what they are doing so that we don't have to start from scratch."
In particular, Dearden and the command don't want to have to reinvent a plan for responding to acts of terrorism.
Terrorism became a very real part of the Olympic Games in September 1972 in Munich when Arab guerrillas attacked the Israeli delegation. Eleven Israelis, five guerrillas and a police officer were killed in the siege. Then in 1996, one woman was killed and more than 120 people were injured when a bomb exploded in Centennial Park during the 1996 Games in Atlanta.
No one wants to see that happen again, but it was on the minds of reporters at a press conference held by the New South Wales police in Sydney.
Ed Hula of the "Around the Rings" Olympic newsletter asked Dearden for his reaction to reports that the FBI had scaled back its search for Eric Rudolph, the anti-abortion activist who is believed to have bombed a Birmingham, Ala., women's clinic and is also charged in connection with the Centennial Park bombing.
"I don't really know if they have, in fact, scaled it back," Dearden said. "But I'm concerned that in the next two years a lot of things can happen. The whole world situation can change. We could end up finding Eric Rudolph and then have other things come up.
"He's not the only thing there is to worry about."
He's right about that, Salt Lake FBI acting special agent in charge Steve Tidwell said.
With the "speed of light" rapidity of modern technology and the number of reporters that gather at Olympic events, the Games are a perfect stage for acts of domestic or international terrorism or for simply making a world statement, Tidwell notes.
"It is certainly real and requires vigilance by law enforcement," he said. "That's why, three years out (from the 2002 Games) you see the public safety command out doing everything they can to make for a safe Olympics."
Domestic terrorism in general -- and especially efforts to prevent it -- has become a high priority for law enforcement agencies on the federal, state and local levels, Tidwell said.
"The face of domestic terrorism changed drastically the day that the Oklahoma City bombing occurred, as evidenced by the efforts of federal, state and local officials around the Y2K rollover time," Tidwell said.
As for the Rudolph investigation, an FBI official in Washington, D.C., said Friday that the investigative approach has been changed but not scaled back. SWAT teams are no longer combing the mountainous North Carolina wilderness where Rudolph is thought to be hiding, but agents continue to follow up leads, spokesman Jim Davis said.
"There is no change in his status as one of our 10 most wanted list," Davis said. "He is still a very high priority."
In addition to the 21 command members from Utah in Sydney, another 60 security representatives from future Olympic cities, such as Athens, are also on hand. Command members will return to Utah later this week and then a smaller team will return to Sydney during the Games in September to actually work at some of the venues and get some hands-on experience, Dearden said.
After seeing all 41 of Sydney's event venues and public gathering places and hearing about the security plans made by the New South Wales police force, which will oversee the Games, Dearden said he is feeling good about the plans already being made for the 2002 Games.
"They've been very open with us, really willing to share information," Dearden said. "It's been really good to hear the process that they've been through. What I'm hearing makes me think that we're exactly where we need to be in terms of planning, although I think it would be nice to add a few more people to the planning process."

Load-Date: March 26, 2000


End of Document