Utahns opine about news of bin Laden's death
The Salt Lake Tribune
May 2, 2011 Monday


Copyright 2011 The Salt Lake Tribune All Rights Reserved
Section: NEWS; State
Length: 306 words
Byline: By Roxana Orellana The Salt Lake Tribune
Body


Utahns heading to work Monday morning reacted to the news of Osama bin Laden's death largely by expressing relief.
But some wondered how the demise of the country's public enemy No. 1 would affect the war on terrorism in the long-run.
"As long there are people who hate the United States, there is always going to be somebody trying to get us," Eric Romney told The Tribune . "But at least Osama bin Laden is out of the picture."
Added Jim Cappo: "I am sure there is somebody waiting in the wings to fill his shoes, but I'm sure it also probably hurts the [al-Qaida] organization. For how long and how much though, I'm not sure."
Vicky Mickelsen said she found the announcement to be "great news" because of all the people bin Laden was responsible for killing.
Kathy Knighton said that despite feeling a sense of relief and comfort at the news, she also felt there was nothing to be thrilled about.
"I am glad to know that he is gone, but it's not a happy moment," Knighton said.
Others expressed skepticism about the validity of bin Laden's death.
"I don't believe them," said Jake, a downtown construction worker who declined to give his last name. "Until I actually see the body, then I'll believe it."
Micah Clark said he, too, wondered if the news was true. With the intelligence resources available in the United States, Clark said, bin Laden could have been found a long time ago. But he added, "It's still amazing that he was found."
Heather White said she has a personal interest in the news because one of her cousins was among the thousands who died in New York City during the Sept. 11. 2001 attacks.
"I just hope [the war on terrorism] moves forward faster now because I have [another] cousin who has been overseas three times," White said. "I'm tired of it."
rorellana@sltrib.com Alt Heads:
Utahns opine about news of bin Laden's death

Load-Date: May 3, 2011


End of Document