Utah Terrorism: Animosity In the Name of Animals; Extremism in Utah Has Many Faces
Salt Lake Tribune (Utah)
March 30, 1997, Sunday


Copyright 1997 The Salt Lake Tribune
Section: Nation-World; Pg. A1
Length: 1210 words
Byline: BY CHRISTOPHER SMITH and VINCE HORIUCHI THE SALT LAKE TRIBUNE
Body


The message "White Power" is being drowned out in Utah by the phrase "Meat is Murder."
In the two years since the Oklahoma City bombing, radical animal-rights activists have proved to be the most dangerous of Utah's homespun extremist groups, not right-wing militias or Neo-Nazi skinheads.
Today, there are nearly two dozen people in Utah believed tied to the Animal Liberation Front (ALF), which has resorted to bombings and arson to get across their point of animal protection, according to Salt Lake Area Gang Project Sgt. Chuck Gilbert. The group adopts a strict "vegan" diet free of animal products.
The Utah members of ALF are believed to have started out as members of Straight Edge, a burgeoning group of anti-drug, anti-sex teens, Gilbert said. There are more than 400 Straight Edgers, but their activities usually are not violent.
"The whole movement has grown," he said. "Two years ago, no one knew who the vegans were."
Since The Salt Lake Tribune surveyed Utah's extremist groups in a 1995 series, militia groups have declined in numbers and remained docile, but animal-rights groups and certain white-supremacist organizations, including the Aryan Nations, are on the rise in Utah.
In the past month alone, members of the radical Animal Liberation Front have claimed responsibility for a March 11 bombing at a mink-feed plant and other vandalism in Salt Lake County, and an attempted arson at Montgomery Fur in Ogden.
"The last year or eight months is when the really serious property damage has happened," Gilbert said. "The whole thing has just been a progression of more violence."
Meanwhile, racist groups have had little to say or do recently, but their numbers are quietly rising, according to experts.
Salt Lake City is now home to local branches of the Aryan Nations and World Church of the Creator, two nationwide groups that promote white racial superiority. The Aryan Nations Salt Lake branch was launched by a Utah man who attended the group's 1995 congress at Hayden Lake, Idaho. The World Church of the Creator Salt Lake chapter was first listed as a "new contact point" in the January 1997 issue of the group's official newsletter, The Struggle.
There are an estimated 27 active chapters of the Aryan Nations in the country, loosely led by aging founder Richard Butler of Idaho. More than a dozen World Church of the Creator groups are active in the country, established "for the survival, expansion and advancement of our white race exclusively" according to the group's prolific literature, authored by the late Ben Klassen, inventor of the electric can opener.
"The skinheads have really filled up the Church of the Creator, which teaches Christianity is a trick Jews are playing on white people to mongrelize the races," says Joe Roy, chief investigator of Klanwatch, an organization that tracks hate groups. "A lot of the more radical organizations have gone underground since Oklahoma, but the real players are still there, and you still have that 10 percent that have unplugged and are at war with this country."
The southwestern Utah community of LaVerkin is still home to a small group of Christian Identity neo-Nazi skinheads known as the Army of Israel, who relocated to Utah from Las Vegas in 1992. Their outspoken leader, Johnny Bangerter, has appeared periodically on national TV talk shows to explain his white-separatist beliefs, including a desire to create a whites-only homeland at Zion National Park.
A collection of religious separatists and Mormon fundamentalists who staked out a preserve in Beaver County, where they obeyed "God's laws" and operated their own court system, were evicted last year after failing to pay property taxes. The Imanuel Foundation and Fraternity of Preparation has continued to argue its right to religious protection from taxation and other state laws in various federal-court lawsuits.
While self-styled "constitutionalists" and so-called "patriot" groups exchange information and hold study groups at various Utah homes, the movement has waned in the state since 1992 Populist Party candidate James "Bo" Gritz collected more presidential votes in Utah (28,391, primarily in Washington, Utah and Box Elder counties) than in any of the other 18 states where his name appeared on the ballot.
Still, bumper stickers and yard signs portending the evils of global government and the United Nations are popular in the polygamous border communities of Hildale, Utah, and Colorado City, Ariz. Primarily a private-property-rights activist source, the National Federal Lands Conference in Bountiful also markets videos and guidebooks on topics such as county sovereignty, militias and abolition of federal agencies such as the Bureau of Land Management.
Because of its sparse population and historic under-regulation by government, the Intermountain West remains one of the seed beds of anti-establishment sentiment, says terrorism author William Eubank of the University of Nevada in Reno.
"It's a cowboy culture, highly individualistic, resistant to regulation, a place where I like to joke people consider stop signs as suggestions rather than commands to be obeyed," says Eubank. "People have attached that attitude to the use of the land and transferred that anger toward anything that restricts their use of the land, that is an imposition on their ability to make a living and hence survive."
Whether they are rising or falling in numbers, these extremist groups share one element: they embrace a message they believe is worth sending out to the world -- at any cost.
That worries officials who are organizing the 2002 Winter Olympics, an event that potentially could be the world's biggest bulletin board for such rhetoric.
While officials working security for the Olympics have to take into account international terrorists, the domestic urban terrorism may be a bigger concern.
"The more-international groups . . . are more sophisticated and strategically plan that out. To them, it's a mission, a surgical strike," said West Valley City Fire Chief W. John Williams, who heads a committee planning fire and emergency services during the Olympics.
But for domestic terrorists and militia groups "it's more loosey-goosey and more passionate," he said. "And because of that, maybe they are more dangerous."
Now with the bombing at the Atlanta Summer Olympics last year, the threat of terrorism in Utah's back yard is all the more real, said Salt Lake City Police Chief Ruben Ortega, co-chairman of another committee planning Olympic security.
"This [terrorism] has got to be the primary concern as far as criminal activity," he said. "There is no question we will have up-to-the-minute data on these groups."
Watered Down Protest
Anti-fur demonstrators carried their cause right to the home of a department store executive in Bellevue, Wash. And that offended his wife, Gina Pickell, so much that she turned a garden hose on them.
"Maybe I went too far, but everyone understands that I was provoked," she said.
The law appeared to be on the side of the protesters, who pressed charges against Pickell. Her first trial on two counts of simple assault ended with a hung jury March 20, and she faces a second trial in May. If convicted, she would face a maximum of a $ 1,000 fine and 90 days in jail on each count.

Load-Date: March 30, 1997


End of Document