Utah Companies' Terror Insurance Limit: $25 Million ; Terrorism Insurance Limit Is $25 Million
Salt Lake Tribune (Utah)
February 9, 2002, Saturday


Copyright 2002 The Salt Lake Tribune
Section: Final; Pg. D1
Length: 377 words
Byline: LESLEY MITCHELL, THE SALT LAKE TRIBUNE
Body


Utah companies that fall victim to terrorist-related acts in most cases will be able to collect no more than $ 25 million from their insurance policies under a new state rule.
Many small businesses are insured for much less than that amount and are unaffected by the Utah Insurance Department's rule, which applies to policies and renewals issued after Jan. 1.
But companies that have more than $ 25 million in property or liability coverage are vulnerable, especially during the Winter Olympics when concerns about terrorism have increased spending on security. Such companies may include a wide range of corporations, organizations and governmental entities that own large buildings, shopping centers or other sizeable developments.
"We're talking with our insurance company right now," said Todd Jensen, chief financial officer of Wasatch Property Management's commercial division, which owns and manages seven office buildings, including the Wells Fargo Plaza high-rise on Main Street near 300 South purchased for $ 78.5 million. "We're obviously concerned about it -- we'd like to see terrorism not be excluded."
The new rule does not apply to biological, chemical or nuclear attacks. It would apply to automobiles or aircraft that collide into buildings. It also would apply to fires or bombs, said Brad Tibbitts, director of the Utah Insurance Department's property and casualty insurance division.
Under the rule, terrorists are loosely defined as members of groups who are trying to intimidate or disrupt government.
The rule change stems from the Sept. 11 attacks, which caused destruction of the World Trade Center and damage to the Pentagon and led to an estimated $ 50 billion in payouts by U.S. companies.
"Insurance companies always have had exclusions for war in their policies, but acts of terrorism really haven't ever been addressed before," Tibbitts said.
Because insurance is regulated on a state level, each state must adopt its own policy to address those requests, he said. Utah has elected to allow insurance companies to add limits only to commercial lines of insurance and not to coverage for private individuals.
Most other states have adopted similar rules with the same limits, except a couple, which have not chosen a plan.
lesley@sltrib.com  

Load-Date: February 10, 2002


End of Document