Utah man charged with terrorism count for allegedly disrupting school with bomb threat
The Salt Lake Tribune
September 23, 2016 Friday


Copyright 2016 The Salt Lake Tribune All Rights Reserved
Section: NEWS; State
Length: 644 words
Byline: The Salt Lake Tribune
Body


A man who parked a car in front of an Eagle Mountain elementary school on Monday, claiming it contained explosives, surrendered only after police allowed him to speak to a robot to record a message for the media, according to charges filed Friday in 4th District Court.
Christopher Dewitt Craig, 35, of Eagle Mountain, was charged with one count of second-degree felony threat of terrorism, and class B misdemeanor counts of disrupting the operation of a school and failure to disclose identity.
An initial court hearing was set for Friday afternoon.
The terrorism charge is punishable by up to 15 years in prison.
On Monday afternoon, Craig drove a car to the front doors of Eagle Valley Elementary, 4475 N. Heritage Drive, and walked inside, wearing a ski mask and a long, light green tunic, police have said. He approached an administrative worker, said that he had parked a car containing explosives next to the school's front door and told her to evacuate the school so no one would get hurt and then walked back out to the car, according to Alpine School District officials.
Students and staff left their classrooms and met outside before leaving the school grounds.
Police tried to speak to Craig, but he only told them to leave and that there was a bomb, according to charges.
He also told officers his name was "Mohammed, then Patience," charges state.
Craig demanded to talk with the press, charges state.
"Once officers had him speak to a robot to record a message for the media he surrendered," charges state.
The episode lasted about two hours. Investigators found no evidence of explosives in the car.
Craig ccc a former head basketball coach at Utah State University Eastern ccc had said in an email sent to multiple news organizations before the episode began that the bomb threat was part of a campaign against black people who challenge racism.
During prior brushes with the law in which he exhibited strange behavior, Craig has called himself an "Islamic jihadist."
On July 10, 2013, Craig was arrested in Thatcher, Ariz., after allegedly entering a classroom on the campus of Eastern Arizona College, where he waved a Bible and asked the instructor whether he was Mormon. Craig then left the classroom and went to another campus building, where he continued to make derogatory statements about Mormons and Catholics before being arrested later at a Thatcher store, according to The Sun Advocate, of Price, where Craig lived at the time.
Craig was booked into Graham County jail in Arizona on suspicion of disorderly conduct and interruption of an educational facility. He was released July 15 after the Graham County district attorney did not file charges.
Soon after, in early August 2013, authorities in Colorado were warning churches about Craig because he said that Mormons and Catholics "would be destroyed" in the coming weeks.
Steamboat Springs police Capt. Jerry Stabile said Craig had been filming himself driving around the mountain city with a towel on his head and sunglasses, according to The Associated Press.
In the most recent case, filed in April 2014, Craig allegedly drove his car onto an elementary school playground. He pleaded guilty a year later to misdemeanor counts of driving on a suspended license, failure to disclose identity and attempted reckless endangerment. Charges of disruption of activities in or near a school building and reckless driving were dismissed.
A judge closed that case by giving Craig credit for 40 days of time served, the court docket says, apparently referring to the 40 days of jail time he served in drug cases.
In a 2014 Sports Illustrated article about Craig, his father suggested that Craig had schizophrenia; the magazine reported that Craig had spent time in a state mental hospital.
Following the bomb threat, Craig was booked into the Utah County jail, where he was being held in lieu of $25,000 cash bail.

Load-Date: September 24, 2016


End of Document