Utahns helping keep London safe for Games
Deseret Morning News (Salt Lake City)
June 28, 2012 Thursday


Copyright 2012 The Deseret News Publishing Co.
Length: 627 words
Byline: Lee Benson Deseret News
Body


 FROM LONDON ? Stu Smith is busy. His wife Brenda is busy. They flew to London this past December, and they have yet to see the crown jewels. They're too busy protecting them. Stu and Brenda are part of the scene behind the scenes at the London Olympics. 
At the request of the organizers of the Games, they left their home in Salt Lake City to spend the year as part of the security team that is implementing procedures and safeguards for London's 17 days of glory from July 27 to Aug. 12. It is no small task ? or team. Official numbers haven't been released, but British media reports estimate that the size of the 2012 security force is somewhere between 24,000 and 49,000 people ? including some 13,500 troops that will be deployed from one end of the Olympic corridor to the other. The Guardian newspaper calls it "the biggest mobilization of military and security forces seen in the U.K. since the second world war." In the post-9/11 world, no crack goes unnoticed. Neither do first-rate security experts. Stu and Brenda were recruited by Team London because of their fine work with the Salt Lake Olympics of 2002, where, less than five months after al-Qaida attacked America, the Winter Games came and went without a significant security glitch. Stu was the chief planning and operations officer for the Salt Lake Olympics, and Brenda, on loan from the Salt Lake County Sheriff's Office, worked in resource management and site venue management at the Grand America Hotel. "I was able to pick my staff," recalls Stu, "I asked Sheriff Kennard if I could borrow one of his best planning officers, Brenda, and he was gracious enough to grant the request." Stu, a native of the Bay Area in California, and Brenda, who moved to Utah from Canada as a teenager, both worked for the Salt Lake County Sheriff's Office during their careers; a mutual friend introduced them before the 2002 Games, and they became Mr. and Mrs. Smith. Brenda has since retired from the sheriff's office, and Stu has become a much sought-after security planner on the international stage. Since 2002, he's helped map security plans for any number of high-level gatherings, including NATO, G-8 and G-20 Summits. London is the latest such assignment, and life has been pretty much nonstop since the Smiths' arrival, Stu reports. Working 12- to 15-hour days ("just like in 2002"), Stu is assisting in the security overlay of all the places where competition will take place. "I have been contracted through companies based in the U.K. to assist in the security overlay used at the Olympic venues," he says. "This is a technology piece of the Games that assists the security function at each venue. I am part of a team of persons doing this work on the Olympic venues that stretch from Glasgow, Scotland, to Cardiff, Wales. I will be helping to make sure the technical security overlay works properly throughout the Olympics Games." As intense and extensive as security was in Salt Lake in 2002, London exceeds that, says Stu. "The Summer Games are four to five times larger than the Winter Games so the size of the event alone poses a challenge," he says. "The world we live in has changed and evolved in the past 10 years. London has been the target of terrorism and knows the threat that terrorism poses. The Games are a high-profile world event, making the level of concern high." Londoners, Stu reports, are eagerly anticipating hosting the Games. "The excitement across London has certainly started to build in the last month," he says. "If there is grumbling," he adds, "it comes from the inconvenience of construction and road closures." Sounds like Salt Lake 10 years ago. And that turned out all right. Lee Benson's About Utah column runs Monday and Friday. Email: lbenson@desnews.com 

Load-Date: June 29, 2012


End of Document