Utah Will Train for Terrorism; Training Will Prepare Utah For Terrorism
Salt Lake Tribune (Utah)
January 13, 1998, Tuesday


Copyright 1998 The Salt Lake Tribune
Section: Utah; Pg. B1
Length: 538 words
Byline: TOM RAMSTACK SPECIAL TO THE TRIBUNE
Body


WASHINGTON -- Leaders from Utah and other parts of the West plan to map out a response to what could be Salt Lake City's worst nightmare: a nuclear, biological or chemical attack.
With the 2002 Winter Olympics fast approaching, the city is top on the federal government's list for needed preparedness.
In a letter to Gov. Mike Leavitt and Mayor Deedee Corradini, the Pentagon said, "In light of recent events and the increased access to and proliferation of nuclear, biological and chemical materials, there is a growing concern about the potential for terrorist incidents involving weapons of mass destruction."
The letter also invited the mayor and governor to send up to five representatives to a meeting in Sacramento, Calif., on Jan. 29 to address the issue. The goal of the conference is to begin developing a response plan that coordinates federal, state and local emergency services.
The emergency plan would be designed to respond to the spread of mustard gas, anthrax spores or some other deadly toxin or virus that could endanger the lives of nearly everyone.
"If something is going to happen in the community, the federal government would not be able to get there in time," said John Ontiveros, deputy director of emergency preparedness for the Army's Chemical and Biological Defense Command. As a result, the Army hopes to train emergency personnel in 120 cities to respond on their own. The effort is part of the federal government's $ 100 million Domestic Preparedness Training Program approved by Congress last year.
"We planned on training in Salt Lake City early because they have the Olympics," Ontiveros said. "We want to make sure they're trained in plenty of time."
Later this year, the Army plans a test run. During an eight-hour mock attack, Army, state and local representatives will test communications links between agencies that would respond in an emergency.
The first test is what the Army calls a "tabletop exercise," in which participants sit at a table and pretend they are responding to an emergency.
Six months later, the Army wants to do another test, this time with real ambulances, fire trucks and medical personnel. They will choose a hypothetical target and call in the "medical strike team."
"We tailor the exercise to meet the unique characteristics of that city," Ontiveros said.
Mike Stever, emergency program director for Salt Lake City, said starting an emergency response plan now reduces the risks for 2002. "We cannot be learning new things two months before the Olympics arrive," he said.
Stever plans to attend the Sacramento meeting along with representatives from the police, fire and public utility departments.
"Any kind of chemical incident we would handle like any other chemical spill," Stever said. "But the biological thing, that's a whole different ballgame. That's frightening. That is beyond the capabilities of local government right now."
An example of the training the Army plans for Salt Lake City was staged in Washington, D.C., last week. Hundreds of police, firefighters, medical personnel and other emergency workers received a four-day crash course. They learned to identify poisonous agents, how to approach the scene of a bio-chem attack and how to handle the equipment.

Load-Date: January 13, 1998


End of Document