UW POLICE CHIEF RECEIVES TRAINING IN COUNTER-TERRORISM
Wisconsin State Journal (Madison, Wisconsin)
September 21, 2008 Sunday
ALL EDITION


Copyright 2008 Madison Newspapers, Inc. All Rights Reserved
Section: LOCAL; Pg. D6; ON CAMPUS
Length: 518 words
Byline: Deborah Ziff
Body


UW-Madison Chief of Police Susan Riseling returned last week from a weeklong trip to Israel to learn counter-terrorism strategies.
The trip was organized and paid for by the Anti-Defamation League and included a dozen police chiefs or majors from cities across the U.S., including Green Bay.
Riseling described it as the best training of her career.
She said the tools she learned as she traveled the country will help the UW-Madison Police Department provide better protection for everything from football games to dignitary protection.
"The difference is the height of the threat," she said. "It's every day there. Their decisions are truly life and death."
She said the group visited police who monitor the borders, Ben Gurion International Airport, major shopping malls and more.
"It was a great trip," Riseling said. "I learned a ton and pray I don't have to use half of it."
Elevator pitch
You've got only an elevator ride to sell a business idea. What should you say?
Teams of students will try to answer that question by developing 90-second business pitches for UW-Whitewater's annual Elevator Pitch Competition.
The idea is to prepare students to sell their business ideas to someone in a limited time frame, in this case, the time it takes to ride an elevator, said UW-Whitewater professor Jimmy Peltier.
The competition will take place Wednesday through Friday.
Contestants will compete for cash prizes and the chance to go to the National CEO Elevator Pitch Competition in November.
Monsanto donation
Monsanto Co. made a $1 million gift to the College of Agricultural and Life Sciences to fund studies of plant breeding and genetics at the graduate level.
The gift from Monsanto, a worldwide agricultural and biotechnology company, will allow students to explore agricultural productivity and environmental stewardship, said CALS Dean Molly Jahn.
Physical sciences lab
Farshid Feyzi was named director of UW-Madison's Physical Sciences Laboratory, its in-house engineering and manufacturing center.
The lab builds one-of-a-kind products for researchers who need rare scientific instruments or experimental tools.
Feyzi has spent most of his career at the lab, overseeing products for the Large Hadron Collider in Geneva Switzerland and the IceCube project in the South Pole, among other things.
Student veterans
UW-Madison created a new post to serve as a resource for student veterans.
Retired U.S. Army Lt. Col. John Bechtol, who has directed the university's Army ROTC program since 2004, was appointed to the position of assistant dean for veterans and ombuds services.
Bechtol will help to ensure veterans have a successful transition into student-life, act as a resource on benefits and will resolve issues for student veterans.
European Union center
The European Union Center of Excellence at UW-Madison received a grant of about $450,000 from the European Commission in Brussels.
The grant ensures the center's funding through 2011.
The center, which was established in 1998, studies such things as new forms of EU governance.
UW-Madison is one of 11 U.S. universities named as European Union centers of excellence.
-

Load-Date: September 23, 2008


End of Document