UW TERRORISM EXPERT PUTS PARIS ATTACKS IN CONTEXT; EDITOR'S COLUMN
The Capital Times (Madison, Wisconsin)
November 25, 2015 Wednesday
ALL EDITION


Copyright 2015 Madison Newspapers, Inc. All Rights Reserved
Section: THE CAP TIMES; Pg. 4
Length: 949 words
Byline:  by PAUL FANLUND 
Body


By a show of hands in two classes early last week, Andrew Kydd helped illustrate why the recent terror attacks in Paris have resonated so profoundly across the United States.
Kydd, a political science professor at the University of Wisconsin-Madison and an expert on terrorism and nuclear arms, is teaching undergraduate classes on each topic this semester. Both met Monday last week.
"So there were roughly 50 in each class," he said. When he asked how many had ever been to Paris, he said, "I would say two-thirds to three-quarters of the hands went up. So we were talking to UW under-grads and they have been to Paris. I hadn't been to Paris when I was an undergraduate."
He added: "I was happy to see that for them, and happy to see that for the United States. People talk about the United States being isolated and not interested in foreign affairs, and, of course, I realize there's a selection because these are the kids who sign up for my classes. ? But they all had interesting things to say and concerns for French people that they had met." Kydd noted how much more the Paris attacks reverberated than suicide attacks in Beirut the day before. (The New York Times reported the reaction in Lebanon under this headline: "Beirut, Also the Site of Deadly Attacks, Feels Forgotten.") "Yeah, people compare it to the Lebanon bombing and say, ?Well, why weren't we as concerned about Lebanon?' The fact remains that if I had asked how many people had been to Beirut, the answer would be zero, or perhaps one," he said.
But despite the widespread horror the Paris attacks generated, Kydd said: "if you look strategically, terrorist attacks don't alter the facts on the ground. In the cool light of analysis, terrorist attacks only affect wars if they affect the country's willingness to fight the war."
Also using that strategic lens, Kydd said another, farless- heralded event that same day is probably much more significant in the war against the Islamic State: the re-taking of Sinjar by Kurdish fighters. A once-sleepy Iraqi town at the foot of a mountain near the border between Iraq and Syria, Sinjar has been on a main supply route between Islamic State group territories in those two countries.
Even more than other recent events beyond Paris such as the crash of a Russian airliner in Egypt that was eventually attributed to a terrorist bomb, the Beirut bombing and the drone strike that apparently killed Mohammed Emwazi, better known as "Jihadi John," Kydd said the fall of Sinjar might be the most important "because that is a key strategic location. It connects the Iraqi and the Syrian portions of the IS (Islamic State). If (Kurdish forces) manage to hold it, that's going to sever the two halves of the Islamic State, which will make it presumably easier to defeat them piecemeal. So to my mind that's the big story."
Kydd has a bachelor's degree from Princeton University and a master's degree and Ph.D. from the University of Chicago, all three in political science. He said he became interested in studying terrorism more deeply after the Sept. 11, 2001, attacks.
I asked him about a remark recently by Aaron Rodgers of the Green Bay Packers, who criticized a spectator at a game against Detroit for shouting "Muslims suck" during a moment of silence for victims in Paris.
"I teach a course on terrorism, I write on terrorism, and I think primarily about strategic aspects of terrorism, why organizations do it, what is the best way to counter it, things of that sort," he said. "So I'm much less focused on some of the domestic political issues facing Wisconsin, but I did think that ? Rodgers' comments were kind of right on."
The Islamic State is "very explicitly" trying to drive Muslims toward extremism by provoking a backlash against those living in the West. "One of the most frequently pursued strategies of terrorism is to try to polarize the situation, to try to make people choose sides, to make people line up, and to get the government into alienating the population, which will then turn to the terrorists for either protection or allegiance.
"And it's a very self-conscious part of the (terrorists') strategy. They're extremely uncomfortable with the fact that Muslims live in the West. Their propaganda recently has been almost plaintive about trying to get people to realize, ?Don't you realize how terrible it is in the West? Why aren't you coming back here? Why don't you come and live with us?' And most people don't want to do that because who would want to, in their right minds?
"So the only way that they can try to get that to happen is to sow that sort of division by hopefully getting non-Muslims or governments in non-Muslim majority countries to act against their local Muslim populations, which will make them unhappy and make them more alienated, more supportive of Islamic extremism." Kydd worries that the backlash here and in France will create the effect terrorists seek. "You have these Republican governors, including our own (Scott Walker), who've taken up this call to not allow Syrian refugees into their states." That might be unconstitutional, Kydd said, but in any case is the kind of reaction the Islamic State seeks.
"I think (President) Obama is actually remarkably calm under the storm. He's Mr. Cool in many ways. He does not get ruffled. So in many ways I think he's kind of an ideal person to be at the helm in such a situation. He places things in context. He doesn't get moved by events like this to radically change strategies."
For most of us, reacting to the horror of Paris with the nuance, perspective and context applied by Kydd feels emotionally unsatisfying and frustrating.
Which, of course, doesn't prevent it from being correct.

Graphic

 
PHOTO BY BRAM JANSSEN/ASSOCIATED PRESS A Kurdish peshmerga fighter stands next to a destroyed building inside the town of Sinjar on Friday, Nov. 13. UW-Madison terrorism expert Andrew Kydd says the capture of the city from the Islamic State likely has more strategic importance in the war than the Paris terrorist attacks, which happened on the same day.

Load-Date: November 26, 2015


End of Document