VA. GUARD SEEKS UNIT TO COMBAT TERRORISM;
FEDERAL TEST PROGRAM STRESSES FAST RESPONSE
Richmond Times Dispatch (Virginia)
March 16, 1998, Monday,
CITY EDITION


Copyright 1998 The Richmond Times Dispatch
Section: AREA/STATE,; (ldb)
Length: 862 words
Byline: Peter Bacque; Times-Dispatch Staff Writer
Body


Concerned about the targets presented by the military and government concentrations in Northern Virginia and Hampton Roads, the Virginia National Guard is trying to get federal funds to set up a special unit to help contain terrorist incidents involving biological or chemical weapons of mass destruction.
The federal government has designated $ 49.2 million for a test program to establish "Rapid Assessment Initial Detection" teams in 10 of the state and territorial National Guards.
The RAID teams, with one located initially in each of the nation's 10 Federal Emergency Management Agency regions, are intended to go into operation during the 1999 federal fiscal year.
Such a unit in Virginia, according to one officer, would consist of 22 soldiers who would be able to react quickly to a terrorist attack using, for instance, deadly anthrax or sarin nerve gas.
"We need someone to come in and make a very quick technical assessment of what's on the ground," said Capt. Tom Leonard, the weapons of mass destruction plans and operations officer with the Pentagon's National Guard Bureau.
"They'd be the spearhead" for a following larger effort to deal with the danger, he said.
The team, made up of members of the Army and Air National Guard, would include reconnaissance, decontamination, medical, security, communications, logistics and air liaison components.
"Somebody lobs a can of sarin gas down in the Metro and we've got a big problem," said one National Guard officer familiar with the matter.
"Those of us in the arena know it's a real threat and it's closer than we'd like to see," the officer said. "It's going to happen, I'm convinced, in the next five years."
Federal facilities such as the Pentagon in Northern Virginia and the Norfolk Naval Base or the Navy's Yorktown weapons storage depot in Hampton Roads make obvious targets for terrorists.
The simple numbers of people in those areas - or metropolitan Richmond, for that matter - also would make them attractive areas for attack.
"We're aware of the developments in this area and we are activelyexploring several options," said Virginia Secretary of Public Safety Gary Aronhalt, "but it would be premature to discuss any details."
In a departure from the National Guard tradition of units made up of part-time soldiers and airmen, the RAID team would be on duty around the clock, Leonard said.
"They'd be on the ground all the time," he said. "There's no spin-up time. All their equipment would be palletized and ready to load."
According to the Defense Department, biological warfare defense rests on three pillars: early warning, protection and recovery.
Warning, or situational awareness, in turn requires the work of units like a RAID team to detect, identify and report the types of biological or chemical agents involved.
The Marine Corps already has a relatively small Chemical-Biological Incident Response Force at Camp Lejeune, N.C., to counter the growing terrorist threat.
If the Virginia National Guard is not approved for the program - Maryland's Guard is supposed to have the inside track for getting the first team in the Mid-Atlantic region - the state has been considering spending its own money to get a RAID unit running.
"Obviously it's something the state's looking at," one Virginia Guard official said, noting that the federal government has earmarked some money for training for such emergencies, money that might be used to underwrite the chemical-biological response team.
The National Guard is a natural organization to handle the RAID units because individual state Guards can quickly react to emergencies in other states without having to go through a time-consuming presidential call-up of reserve forces.
"We all want to be out there killing bad guys," said one Guard officer, "but this is the role for us that will serve the country best."
Eventually, the Pentagon would like to have the detection teams in all the nation's states and territories.
Secretary of Defense William S. Cohen announced March 3 that U.S. military personnel deployed to the Arabian Gulf region will be vaccinated against the biological warfare agent anthrax.
The U.S. intelligence community has determined that anthrax is the primary biological warfare threat faced by U.S. forces, the Defense Department said.
More than 10 countries have, or are suspected of, developing a biological warfare capability. Anthrax is the easiest biological agent to produce and make into weapons, the department said, and lately, Iraq has admitted to producing biological warfare agents using anthrax.
Anthrax is an infectious disease that normally afflicts animals, especially cattle and sheep. Anthrax spores can be produced in a dry form which may be stored and ground into particles. When inhaled by humans, these particles cause respiratory failure and death within a week.
Anthrax is a silent killer, in both inhalational and intestinal anthrax. The fatality rate is almost 100 percent, regardless of medical treatment received after being exposed.
Military officials also point out that America is no longer safe from terrorism at home - the World Trade Center and Oklahoma City Federal Building bombings demonstrate that, they said.

Load-Date: March 18, 1998


End of Document