Valley schools torn on teaching of 9/11 events
East Valley Tribune (Mesa, Arizona)
September 11, 2006 Monday


Copyright 2006 East Valley Tribune
Distributed by McClatchy-Tribune Business News
Section: STATE AND REGIONAL NEWS
Length: 901 words
Byline: Andrea Falkenhagen, The Tribune, Mesa, Ariz.
Body


Sep. 11--For five years, schools have struggled with how to address teaching students about the Sept. 11, 2001, terrorist attacks.
It's a sensitive and scary topic. Some educators would leave talk of terrorism to social studies classes, while others want ceremonies to commemorate those who have fallen in its name.
On the day of the attacks, many schools shut out all images of the destruction.
The district "told us not to alarm the kids and to not have the TVs going," said Karen Mion, who taught Spanish at Kyrene Aprende Middle School in Chandler.
"We could acknowledge that it happened. We just weren't supposed to talk about it," she said.
In other schools, such as Greyhawk Elementary in the Paradise Valley Unified School District, discussion was welcomed.
"I pulled down the world map and showed them where we live and where New York was," said Elie Gaines, who then taught second grade at Greyhawk. "My job at that day was to make our children feel safe, even though we really didn't know what was going on."
Now, state education leaders have created standardized educational activities schools can use to teach about the fateful day.
When Gov. Janet Napolitano appointed members to a Sept. 11 Memorial Commission, she charged them with creating an ongoing education component to honor the Americans who died.
"If you put the curriculum into place, you can keep it alive. Kids will always be learning about it," said Steve Speisman, a Scottsdale teacher whose brother was killed when American Airlines Flight 77 crashed into the Pentagon.
Today's teens have come of age in an environment where America is vulnerable to attacks on its own soil, explained Malvika Sinha, 17, a co-editor of the student newspaper at Corona del Sol High School in Tempe.
Sinha interviewed her classmates for a Sept. 11 edition and said she found that teens think less often about the terror attacks now than they did five years ago.
"Most students are not planning to do anything special. They said they would pause to think about the day, and move on," she said.
Sinha said classes often discuss the attacks with regard to the war or Patriot Act, a law meant to help fight terrorism, but some teachers are reluctant to delve into the discussion because it usually ends in a heated debate.
"It depends on the teacher, but some will not talk about it because they don't want to get into any political debates," she said.
Educators who developed the new lessons said they will help teachers navigate the sensitive topics.
"I don't know of another state that has actually gone through and developed an activity like this," said Carol Warren, an education program specialist at the Arizona Department of Education.
The kindergarten lessons on the event start very basically, with children discussing a photograph of a firefighter raising an American flag.
"They are very powerful lessons, but also sensitive to the needs of children," Gaines said. "The big idea is to start with freedom and those who help protect our freedom and keep us safe."
All lessons are directly tied to state social studies standards, she said.
In later grades, students discuss terrorism, and are asked to write questions they would ask a terrorist.
But when the topic turns to terrorism, the door opens to possible stereotyping.
Nure Elatari, director of the state's Council on American-Islamic Relations, said it is crucial for teachers to include lessons on tolerance.
"We should be educating people . . . to learn not to blame the first Muslim they see walking on the road or in your neighborhood grocery store for what happened on 9/ 11," she said.
Speisman said the committee included such lessons in the curriculum, one of which asks seventh-graders to discuss how "as a result of 9/11, some people had angry feelings about people who came from different parts of the world or dressed differently than most Americans."
As a Muslim, Yasmine Asfoor, 16, said she welcomes class discussions about terrorism at Tempe Union's Mountain Point High School in Ahwatukee Foothills.
They have never taken an ugly turn, and far from making her feel awkward, she said it allows her to dispel myths about Muslims.
"I've been pretty lucky, people at my school are openminded, and I get a lot of people who come up and ask me questions," she said.
Many East Valley schools have elected not to use the new Sept. 11 lessons.
At Fees Middle School in Tempe, eighth-graders made a flag for each person who died in the terror attacks.
At Mesa's Dobson High School, students are encouraged to wear red, white and blue, said principal Matt Gehrman.
Yet many schools said they are not planning anything special, including several in Apache Junction and Mesa.
Speisman, though, wishes every school would use the new state activities.
"I see how hungry these kids are for knowledge. When we discuss this (in class), everyone has something to say," he said.
"They watch TV. They see . . . the terror alert raised to orange. That's scary for kids. And if the adult work does not give them direction, I think we're in trouble," Speisman said.
CONTACT WRITER: (480) 898-5635 or afalkenhagen@aztrib.com
Copyright (c) 2006, The Tribune, Mesa, Ariz. Distributed by McClatchy-Tribune Business News. For reprints, email tmsreprints@permissionsgroup.com, call 800-374-7985 or 847-635-6550, send a fax to 847-635-6968, or write to The Permissions Group Inc., 1247 Milwaukee Ave., Suite 303, Glenview, IL 60025, USA.

Load-Date: September 12, 2006


End of Document