VCU WILL TEST WATER FOR CITY;
ANTI-TERRORISM PROGRAM ADDS LEVEL OF SECURITY
Richmond Times Dispatch (Virginia)
February 4, 2003 Tuesday City Edition


Copyright 2003 Richmond Newspapers, Inc.
Section: AREA/STATE; Pg. B-1
Length: 466 words
Byline: Rex Springston, Times-Dispatch Staff Writer, Contact Rex Springston at (804) 649-6453 or rspringston@timesdispatch.com,  
Body


In an effort to detect terrorism, Virginia Commonwealth University scientists will test Richmond's water for dangerous contaminants.
The tests will look for highly contagious germs, radioactive contaminants and toxic chemicals such as pesticides. The program is unique in Virginia and may be unique in the country, VCU officials said.
"While our obvious priority is protecting against terrorist acts, the monitoring system provides added detection of naturally occurring risks as well," said Dr. Shelley A. Harris, a VCU epidemiologist leading the program's development.
Richmond tests its water now for such things as fecal bacteria, fluoride and lead. The VCU tests will look for many more pollutants, particularly those that are highly toxic or highly contagious to people, Harris said.
"We have a very broad capability to detect anything unusual in the water supply," she said.
Nothing is wrong with the city's water, Richmond officials emphasized. The new tests are designed to provide extra protection for the 500,000 people who drink water from Richmond. Those customers are in the city and in parts of Chesterfield, Hanover and Henrico counties.
City officials approached VCU about devising the tests, school officials said. Richmond is paying VCU $140,000 to develop the program, and the city probably will take it over eventually.
Preliminary tests began last summer, Harris said. The full program should be running in about two months.
The tests will provide preliminary data in a couple of hours. Depending on the contaminant, confirmation may take a few more hours or even days.
Richmond workers collect water samples for the tests. The samples include raw water from the James River as well as treated water from the city's water-treatment plant and from individual taps.
The program is a good example of preparing for terrorism instead of simply responding to it, Harris said. "I think the city should get some credit for it."
VCU officials declined to disclose the types of tests they will run or the equipment they will use. Disclosing such details would make it easier for terrorists "to avoid the surveillance that we are doing," said Dr. Cliff Fox, assistant director of VCU's Center for Environmental Studies. The center is the main section of VCU involved in the testing program.
VCU also is developing an emergency-response plan in the event of contamination. The plan could include warnings to neighborhoods or the entire region. The warnings could call for actions such as boiling water, avoiding water altogether or evacuating a neighborhood, Fox said.
Dr. Greg C. Garman, director of VCU's environmental center, called the collaboration with the city "a unique alliance among microbiologists, molecular biologists, epidemiologists, engineers, environmental scientists and policy-makers."

Load-Date: February 6, 2003


End of Document