VDOT SECURITY TOUGHER/ IN THE WAKE OF 9/11, THE HIGHWAY DEPARTMENT TAKES STEPS AGAINST TERRORISM
Richmond Times Dispatch (Virginia)
February 16, 2004 Monday City Edition


Copyright 2004 Richmond Newspapers, Inc.
Section: AREA/STATE; Pg. B-1
Length: 708 words
Byline: Peter Bacque/ Times-Dispatch Staff Writer/ * Contact Peter Bacque at (804) 649-6813 or pbacque@timesdispatch.com,  
Body


Confronted with a world changed by the Sept. 11 terrorist attacks, the Virginia Department of Transportation is changing how it does business, hardening its people and its places against terrorism.
"This is not your father's VDOT," said Steven M. Mondul, the department's security chief, "and it never will be again."
VDOT, the state's lead agency for transportation security, has a lot to worry about.
The Old Dominion is home to inviting transportation targets: Interstate 95, the East Coast's Main Street; vital bridges and tunnels; Hampton Roads' military sites; the heavily used Washington regional Metro transit system; national rail arteries; and some of the country's busiest airports.
VDOT is directly responsible for 57,000 miles of road, including 1,118 miles of interstate highway, more than 12,600 bridges, six big tunnels and four ferry operations.
Faced with those concerns, VDOT has set up a special office to run its anti-terrorism efforts. The year-old Security and Emergency Management Division has a staff of 30 -many of them with military or law-enforcement backgrounds - and an annual budget of $4.5 million.
"A lot of what I'm into is deterrence," Mondul said. "If I make it too hard to do something, they're going to go someplace else and we've won a small part of the battle."
Personal identification cards, in use in VDOT's central office for years, are now mandatory for all the agency's offices. VDOT boasts that it uses the same system the Pentagon does.
VDOT once did background checks only on the holders of crucial jobs such as ferry-boat pilots. Now VDOT investigates several hundred employees whose jobs involve crucial infrastructure or security sensitivities, from Smart Traffic Center staff to some equipment operators.
Since 2002, VDOT has spent more than $4 million for security systems.
"We're investing considerably in intrusion alarms, perimeter-penetration alarms, closed-circuit cameras and motion detectors," said Mondul, a retired naval officer.
At the Hampton Roads Bridge-Tunnel, for example, automatic gates limit access to the bridge-tunnel island. And "usually a state police cruiser's there that didn't use to be," Mondul said.
Mondul said that at the end of the six-year program, "we'll have pretty much the basic physical infrastructure in place to be where we need to be."
While security technology is expensive and takes time to set up, "it's basically simple," Mondul said. "Putting procedures in place, changing transportation culture and making security a way of life is the real challenge."
VDOT has started mandatory online training in basic security awareness for its employees. "It's all up to federal standards," Mondul said, "and some of it is better than federal standards."
Other courses are tailored to VDOT specialists, such as safety-service patrol members and tunnel workers who might have to deal with suspicious people and packages.
Experience demonstrates that terrorists visit a potential target area at least twice before attacking, officials said.
"A worthwhile countermeasure is to note people who would have no other business in an area we're talking about," Mondul said, "and who show up more than once."
VDOT's security department has conducted a statewide inventory of infrastructure considered most vulnerable to terrorism and sabotage, and it is working with local transportation officials to increase security efforts.
Federal and state officials have cited VDOT for its forward-looking measures to guard the commonwealth's highway infrastructure.
"I'd hold up VDOT as a national model on how to do this post-9/11 security . . . and do it well," said George W. Foresman, deputy assistant to the governor for commonwealth preparedness.
"We have a number of areas where we're trying to do pilot testing," Foresman said. "VDOT is so good to turn to. They'll do a pilot test . . . and they'll do it quickly."
In the post-9/11 world, VDOT has left behind many of its trusting ways.
Out in the western part of the state, Mondul noted, the old practice was to leave the keys in VDOT trucks rather than risk losing them. Now, keys are not left in trucks, which could be used as infiltration devices or bombs.
"We have to be a hundred percent," Mondul said. "The bad guys only have to get lucky once."

Graphic

 
PHOTO

Load-Date: February 18, 2004


End of Document