Venet: Insurers, landlords recognize need to secure office buildings
Long Island Business News
October 23, 2019 Wednesday


Copyright 2019 BridgeTower Media All Rights Reserved


Section: NEWS
Length: 753 words
Byline: Commentary
Body


The terrorist attacks in Oklahoma City and New York’s World Trade Center shocked the nation, raising concerns about our vulnerability. It’s clear we are at risk as we pass through public spaces. Recent attacks in El Paso and Dayton and attempts to detonate explosives on our streets and major commercial centers amplify concerns. Schools and houses of worship have moved with urgency to secure campuses.The broader challenge of protecting public and commercial spaces has been slow. 
The slower pace is due to complexities of securing differently designed buildings. Also, commercial building owners have never had to factor protection against terrorism into the overall cost of property ownership. Until now. Compassion drives efforts to safeguard schools, synagogues, churches and mosques. Financial incentives motivate commercial real estate owners to protect tenants against terrorism. It’s unusual for commercial property owners to adopt building-wide security, but recently there is an uptick in landlord-sponsored upgrades to secure building access. Owners recognize the financial need to protect against the calamity of liability if nothing were done. This trend extends to installing security window film and film attachment systems to safeguard occupants against blast-driven glass-shrapnel injury; and, to preserve the building envelope against blast load. The burden of securing commercial offices has fallen to tenants, who have developed plans to make their workplace safer. While they may work in relative safety, a neighboring firm two floors above may not have made the same efforts.The hope is that forward-thinking building owners may turn their attention to fortifying windows, providing protection against the lethality of exploding glass shrapnel and speeding operative recovery time. Insurance companies recognize the importance of making work places safer, and restoring operations quickly following an event. Fortifying a building’s windows saves valuable resources on medical expenses and business interruption costs. The results could be lower premiums. Clearly we can’t eliminate all risks. However, sensible plans can be developed to identify threats and implement the measures to reduce injuries, deaths, and business interruption. These steps buy time for first responders to arrive on the scene. Law enforcement, security technologies, engineers, architects, builders, and security film professionals develop a “layered” approach to securing a building  from the outside in. Here are the components of a basic security plan for those entering public or private buildings. Define threats:   Determine areas most at risk, such as conference rooms, perimeter offices and outdoor patios at risk from attacks or explosions on streets.   Armed intruders may threaten forced entry. But it’s easier to deposit a hand-carried explosive device nearby a building in hedges, garbage cans which provide cover for devices. The cover should be removed.   Analyze the weak points  pedestrian and vehicle entries  as well as the curtain wall of windows starting on the ground floor. Consider the following:   Install real-time cameras to provide immediate, vital information.   Harden entry doors and ground-level window/doors to slow forced entry.   Harden upper level windows with security films.   Provide administrative, security, custodial staff and local police with up-to-date floor plans. Exits should be labeled with photo-luminescent signage.   Fortify entry vestibules with lock-down capabilities in the event the perimeter entry is breached.   Add safe exits from lunchrooms, conference rooms, corridors and atriums. With this information, a security and evacuation plan with the following components takes shape:   Security personnel atentry points;   Security cameras to monitor all areas outside and within;   Limit access points;   Security/blast-mitigation window film;   Metal detectors;   A program to continually receive intelligence from law enforcement regarding trending threats;   Develop a budget;   Educate employees, property managers, and others aware of what to look out for. We must acknowledge that it’s a dangerous world.But we can all make a contribution toward our safety with a thoughtful and comprehensive strategy focused on securing public spaces.   Daniel Venet is executive vice president of CHB Industries, a Hauppauge-based company that provideswindow film solutions for commercial and residential buildings.
Copyright © 2019 BridgeTower Media.  All Rights Reserved.

Load-Date: October 29, 2019


End of Document