Ventura discusses security to help calm fears;
In TV address, he says state is prepared to fight terrorism
Star Tribune (Minneapolis, MN)
November 14, 2001, Wednesday, Metro Edition


Copyright 2001 Star Tribune
Section: NEWS; Pg. 2B
Length: 765 words
Byline: Dane Smith; Sarah T. Williams; Staff Writers
Body


RSEC:            In his first major televised address on security since the Sept. 11 terrorist attacks, Gov. Jesse Ventura on Tuesday night summarized actions the state is taking to prevent and respond to possible terrorism. He urged citizens to "be alert and be careful. But be free."
     Ventura, speaking from a prepared text in the Twin Cities Public Television studio in St. Paul, also warned that the state is facing a projected budget shortfall and an "unsettled economy" and that "we have a very large challenge before us."
   Although he has said he favors spending reductions and opposes tax increases to balance the budget, he promised that "any decisions we make will not in any way interfere with our ability to defend ourselves against terrorism."
     As an example of state preparations for possible terrorism, Ventura said Minnesota's Health Alert Network was activated almost two hours faster than that of the national Centers for Disease Control and Prevention after the anthrax outbreak was reported.
     Ventura revealed no new initiatives but reviewed the work of a half-dozen task forces and multiagency efforts to guard against an attack.
     Like President Bush in recent speeches, Ventura challenged citizens to serve as eyes and ears for the state and be on alert for suspicious activity.
     Quoting Al Garber, the state's natural resources commissioner, Ventura said that "an alert citizenry would provide the best intelligence for our government agencies to act on. [Garber] said that it is true that generally crimes are solved not through some sophisticated type of science, but rather through someone telling a law enforcement agency who did it."
   Ventura didn't respond to viewers' questions, wasn't available for reporters' questions and left the station immediately after his speech. However, Public Safety Commissioner Charlie Weaver and Health Commissioner Jan Malcolm were interviewed afterward.
      John Wodele, Ventura's spokesman, said that he thought the governor "did a good job calming Minnesotans" immediately after the attacks and that his commissioners have been accessible and active in publicizing the state's preparations since then.
     "This was a chance to get caught up, to let the media and the people know about all the things we're doing," Wodele said.
     Ventura's 20-minute statement was part of a 90-minute local program, which followed a national Public Broadcasting System television documentary on bioterrorism. As part of the local program, carried on all the state's public television stations, viewers were encouraged to call in or e-mail questions to Weaver, Malcolm and about 30 state experts in the studio.
    Among the queries:
    - One caller wanted to know how he could feel safe if only about 10 percent of the baggage at the airports is X-rayed. Lt. Col. Denny Shields, spokesman for the Minnesota National Guard, said that he isn't sure that figure is correct, that security has been enhanced at airports and that "we are a lot safer now than we were before September 11." He added that he is flying to the West Coast on a commercial flight.
     - Another caller wanted to know why the state wasn't providing widespread inoculations against anthrax and smallpox. Malcolm said that the risk is not proportionate to that solution, that anthrax vaccination is "not fun" and that there are "very, very serious side effects, even death" with smallpox vaccinations.
    - Another caller, saying that some disabled New York City high-rise dwellers near the World Trade Center were left untended for days, asked what the state is doing to prepare for evacuation of disabled people's homes. He was told to contact his building owner and city officials if he was dissatisfied with the response.
   - Several callers questioned whether enough security has been provided at the state's nuclear power plants. Weaver said that reports that the state had turned down official requests for more guards at the plants were not true and that the state would consider helping out if local police officials asked.
     Malcolm said the threats to public safety need to be taken in context. She urged Minnesotans to do ordinary things to protect their health: "Don't smoke, get enough rest, wash your hands often," she said.   And she urged citizens to "reconnect to community, give blood, give to victims, do volunteer work, help neighbors, be a school volunteer."
     "The best way to fight back is to take charge of things that are in our control," she said.
    _ The reporters are at
rdsmith@startribune.com.  
swilliams@startribune.com.  

Load-Date: November 14, 2001


End of Document