Ventura discusses terrorism;
'We don't scare easily,' he says
Star Tribune (Minneapolis, MN)
October 20, 2001, Saturday, Metro Edition


Copyright 2001 Star Tribune
Section: NEWS; Pg. 2B
Length: 450 words
Byline: Conrad deFiebre; Staff Writer
Dateline: wn
Body


RSEC:             After meeting Friday with leaders of North Dakota and Manitoba about border security and other matters, Gov. Jesse Ventura urged Minnesotans not to be consumed with fear over terrorism, particularly via biological weapons.
     "More than 40,000 people died of flu last year in the United States," he said on his weekly radio show, broadcast from the Manitoba Legislative Building in Winnipeg. "And so far, we've had one person die of anthrax in the whole nation."
   Drunken driving and even commuting are far greater risks than bioterrorism, he said.
     "Go about your business," he said. "Be aware, be alert, but don't be frightened. We don't scare easily in America."
     Ventura, however, defended this week's tests for anthrax at his State Capitol office and residences when a caller criticized them. The teacher from Linwood Township, in Anoka County, suggested that money could have been better spent on schools.
     "It doesn't cost much to test," Ventura said, noting that public safety officials had ordered the checks.
     Ventura spent most of the morning talking to North Dakota Gov. John Hoeven and Manitoba Premier Gary Doer about Red River basin issues. Tourism, trade and border security also were discussed.
     "We don't want to make the borders inaccessible," Ventura said afterward. "There's a fine line. As a result of Sept. 11, security should be more stringent. But we want the Canadians back at the Mall of America. We miss you."
     In normal times, 300,000 Manitobans visit Minnesota each year, but officials acknowledged a dropoff over the past five weeks. Still, Ventura said, there is hope that people reluctant to travel long distances for pleasure will plan shorter trips instead, such as from Manitoba to Minnesota.
     South Dakota Gov. Bill Janklow missed the Winnipeg talks because of business in Washington, D.C., and Ventura threw a humorous jab at him.
     "I think he's doing new ads to try to get Minnesota businesses to move to South Dakota," he said. "The only problem with that is you've got to live in Sioux Falls. If it's so great, why do they have to advertise?"
     Next year's annual meeting of the governors and premier will be in Minnesota, and Ventura said that will give Janklow and him a chance to "butt heads."
     He also gave Hoeven a hard time about the University of Minnesota's recent hockey victory in the opening game at the University of North Dakota's new ice arena. But Ventura said he did Hoeven a favor by not betting on the outcome.
     "I'm not making any more sports bets anyway," Ventura said. "Come to think of it, what does North Dakota have to give us?"
     _ Conrad deFiebre is at cdefiebre@startribune.com.  

Graphic

 
PHOTO

Load-Date: October 22, 2001


End of Document