Vent line
Charleston Daily Mail (West Virginia)
October 1, 2014, Wednesday


Copyright 2014 Charleston Newspapers
Section: NEWS; Pg. P8A
Length: 527 words
Body


? What is W.Va. American Water purging in Cross Lanes?
All week long they have purged water from the fire hydrants in Cross Lanes and the tanks. What are they purging from the water in Cross Lanes?
? To the person asking why
Foodland isn't donating water because people still need it after the chemical spill: Why are you so afraid of clean water?
? I am shocked that the city of Dunbar, the principal of Dunbar Middle School and the Kanawha County Board of Education are allowing construction to go on right at the front doors of the school.
Students have no safe place to walk. Parents have no safe place to park their cars. They had all summer to do this work. It is a very dangerous situation. This is a lawsuit waiting to happen.
? We have seen six and a half years of President Obama's leadership and the results are not pretty.
? I noticed a lady died at the age of 103. I also noticed she had no children. That could be a clue.
? How is it the mayor of South Charleston, Frank Mullens, who makes $85,000 a year, can get away with being at home every afternoon and never at city hall? Have you noticed when he is interviewed for television he is always at his house?
? For the people out there
who think Fox is "fair and balanced," well they made fun of a female pilot who is serving overseas by saying, "Would that be considered boobs on the ground." You can tell they can't stand women.
? How many innocent Americans have to die right here in our own country at the hands of Muslim terrorists before the Obama administration will take domestic terrorism seriously and call it what it is - Islamic terrorism?
? If you were walking down
the street after dark, which would you rather meet? A group of Muslims coming from a mosque or a group of Christians coming from a Bible study?
? Pete Thaw should be removed from the Board of Education after his comments regarding the 6-year-old from Midland Trail Elementary having a gun on the school bus. He thinks this is a laughing matter.
? The roads in Dunbar are a mess where they are working on sewer lines. They are tearing our roads up. When are they going to repave the roads instead of just patching them? It is destroying our vehicles.
? Interesting to see that Yeager Airport is looking at solar energy to power the entire airport. We need to look at the payback.
The project will probably cost about $20 million.
? Look out West Virginia. We
have so many kids being truant.
What makes a kid want to go to school anyway? Is it because they have to? Or is it because the teachers are engaging and are wonderful?
? If the superintendent doesn't screen the teachers then the school principals can hire who they want - like someone who refuses to call your child by name and continuously puts them down all year long. These kids are your future, West Virginia.
? I worked at the hospital
for 42 years and they did not buy my uniforms. I think you might be talking about the surgery area where they did provide scrubs.
? A vote for Natalie Tennant
is a vote for the Obama administration and for Harry Reid to continue their failed and terrible policies for this country. A vote for Capito is a vote to change the agenda in the Senate.

Load-Date: October 1, 2014


End of Document