Verdict in N.Y. Bomb Trial Seen as Signal to Terrorists
Christian Science Monitor (Boston, MA)
March 7, 1994, Monday


Copyright 1994 The Christian Science Publishing Society
Section: THE U. S.; NATIONAL; Pg. 8
Length: 881 words
Byline: Ron Scherer, Staff writer of The Christian Science Monitor
Dateline: NEW YORK
Highlight: US declares victory as jury convicts four men for the 1993
bombing
Body


THE United States government is hoping it has provided a lesson
for would-be terrorists: If you try to operate in the US, you will
be caught, tried and jailed, possibly for the rest of your life.
That's the message following the conviction on Friday of all
four men charged with bombing the World Trade Center a little more
than a year ago.
Now, the government is preparing for an even larger terrorism
trial in September when it will try to get a conviction of 15 men,
some of whom were caught as they were mixing ''a witch's brew'' of
bomb chemicals.
According to the government indictment, the men planned to blow
up government buildings, such as the FBI headquarters and the
United Nations, and the tunnels under the Hudson River.
One of the defendants in the case is Sheikh Omar Abdel-Rahman,
a blind Muslim fundamentalist cleric who the government believes
was instrumental in inspiring the men with fiery anti-American
rhetoric from a store-front mosque in Jersey City, N.J.
The main difference between the two trials is that in the second
trial the government used an informant, Emad Salem, to alert them
to the bombing threat and stopped the attacks beforehand. ''It will
be claimed the guy is a liar - there is a different dynamic to that
case,'' says Gerard Lynch, the former head of the criminal-
enforcement division at the Department of Justice and now a
professor at Columbia University.
Another difference is that many of the alleged conspirators were
arrested as they were mixing the bomb chemicals. The defense may
claim that the defendants were trapped, since Mr. Salem was working
for the government and would get more money if his work led to
arrests.
However, entrapment is a difficult defense because the
government can then demonstrate that the defendants may have been
predisposed to commit the crime anyway. ''Suppose people say they
are mad about something but instead of a peaceful protest they
decide to blow up a building and they ask the government agent
'which building?' and he replies 'the White House,' the fact that
the target came from the government does not matter,'' explains Mr.
Lynch.
The convictions in the World Trade Center case may also have a
bearing on the other trial, making it more difficult to obtain an
impartial jury. ''It will undoubtedly make it more difficult - the
question is: 'Will the judge be asked for a thorough and searching
voir dire [examination of the proposed jurors]?' '' says Martin
Adelman, a defense lawyer and past chairman of the New York State
Bar Association's criminal-justice section.
Mary Jo White, the US Attorney for the Southern District of New
York, joined other officials, including President Clinton, in
proclaiming that the World Trade Center trial was a signal.
''Anyone who seeks to come into this country to practice terrorism
will have the full weight of law enforcement brought against
them,'' stated Mr. Clinton after the convictions were announced by
the jury.
ONE of the major reasons for the guilty verdict is the enormous
resources the government threw into the case. Hundreds of FBI
agents combed through the rubble of the bombed-out World Trade
Center garage. They pulled fingerprints off the pages of bomb
manuals the terrorists had in their possession. They searched phone
records, which showed how the men were linked. And, they found
witnesses who had seen the men acquiring bomb materials as well as
transporting them to the World Trade Center on Feb. 26, 1993.
''This is the kind of case the FBI does best,'' says Lynch.
''They have the ability to bring in a lot of people who can do
hard, boring detail work that requires patience and yet have the
expertise to present it as scientific evidence,'' he adds.
In fact, the circumstantial evidence was like a critical mass in
convincing the jurors to convict the men on all 38 counts. The
decision came after four full days of deliberation. The jurors
mulled over thousands of pages of testimony from 207 prosecution
witnesses and more than 1,000 exhibits. Found guilty were Nidal
Ayyad, Mohammed Salameh, Mahmud Abouhalima, and Ahmad Ajaj. The
defendants all planned to appeal the verdict.
A lifelong jail term without parole is the prospect for the four
men, who will be sentenced by Judge Kevin Duffy on May 4.
The prosecutors demonstrated during the trial how the men
acquired the materials for a 1,200 pound bomb made with fertilizer
and enhanced with nitroglycerin and compressed hydrogen. They built
the bomb in a Jersey City apartment and planted it in a rented van
in a garage under the twin towers. One of the defendants fled to
Egypt, which extradited him to the US, and a second defendant
planned to leave the day after he was arrested.
Terrorism expert Robert Kupperman says there are lessons to be
learned from the trial.
''The first lesson is that using a fairly crude device,
terrorists can create a giant problem,'' he explains. There is no
doubt about that: The bomb killed six people, injured thousands,
and cost nearly $ 550 million. One year later, parts of the building
are still undergoing repairs.
Mr. Kupperman says the second lesson is that the US needs to
constantly be in the intelligence business.
''If there are no acts of terrorism in the next six months and
the government continues counterintelligence, there will be
complaints. But, to not do it, invites the most serious of
episodes,'' he says.

Graphic

 
PHOTO: VICTORY SPEECH: US Attorney Mary Jo White, flanked
by other prosecutors at press briefing, welcomes guilty verdict in
World Trade Center trial., MIKE SAGAR/REUTERS

Load-Date: March 8, 1994


End of Document