Veteran To Share Perspective On Terrorism
The Tampa Tribune (Florida)
January 11, 2003, Saturday,
FINAL EDITION


Copyright 2003 The Tribune Co. Publishes The Tampa Tribune
Section: PLANT CITY,
Length: 551 words
Byline: KARLAYNE R. PARKER, kparker@tampatrib.com; Reporter Karlayne R. Parker can be reached at (813) 754-3763.  
Body


MARINE WILL TELL OF FIRSTHAND EXPERIENCE
PLANT CITY - In parts of Europe and the Middle East, terrorism is something people live with on a daily basis.
It wasn't until Sept. 11 that Americans began to inquire about the roots of terrorism.
Now, with U.S. troops lining up to battle Middle Eastern foes, it seems there is an even greater need to understand terrorism, said Claire Jordan of Friends of the Bruton Memorial Library, a volunteer group that supports the library.
"With the problems going on in Korea, Iraq and Kuwait, we need to understand what is going on," Jordan said.
David Sconyers, dean of the school of arts and sciences at South Florida Community College south of Avon Park, will bring some clarity to the topic when he speaks on "Understanding Terrorism" at 7 p.m. Jan. 23 at Bruton Memorial Library, 302 McLendon St.
Sconyers is a former Marine captain who served in the Vietnam War and was a researcher with the Foreign Policy Institute in the 1970s.
He has traveled extensively in the Middle East, the Sudan and Yemen, all hot spots that are in the news almost daily.
"I've been dealing with this topic for the past 20 years," Sconyers said. "There is sort of a cycle of interest. The public is interested when it gets personal."
Sconyers will give an academic perspective on the historical and political roots of current events.
"There are many definitions of terrorism," he said. "It seems that it becomes terrorism when it is closer to you."
Sconyers will break down the topic of terrorism into basic tenets of survival that deal with population and distribution of wealth in a given area.
Part of his discussion will focus on his personal dealings with terrorism in Yemen years ago. He worked there but was forced out of the country because of increased violence.
"I still have a lot of contacts there," he said.
Discussions on terrorism have increased since Sept. 11, he said.
In that time, Sconyers has been surprised about how many people are misinformed about countries that are said to be in the midst of turmoil.
Sconyers will encourage those attending the discussion to use multiple media sources including foreign newspapers to better understand how others live overseas and with terrorism.
"People just realize how little they know," he said of the discussions. "There is a lot of apprehension and frustration."
Library Director Anne Haywood said an increasing number of books on terrorism are being published. However, library patrons could benefit from Sconyers' firsthand knowledge.
"We are trying to come to grips with our changing world," Haywood said. "It [this program] shows the real attention to the pulse of what is going on in our world."
The program is funded by the Florida Humanities Council, a nonprofit organization funded by private donations, the National Endowment for the Humanities and the Florida Department of State, Division of Cultural Affairs. The council is in St. Petersburg.
The program is free.

(CHART) AT A GLANCE
WHAT: David Sconyers will speak on "Understanding Terrorism." Sconyers, dean of the school of arts and sciences at South Florida Community College, is a former Marine captain who served in the Vietnam War and was a researcher with the Foreign Policy Institute in the 1970s.
WHEN: 7 p.m. Jan. 23
WHERE: Bruton Memorial Library, 302 McLendon St.
COST: Free

Graphic

 
PHOTO CHART
David Sconyers
Speaker is a former Marine captain who served in Vietnam War.

Load-Date: January 13, 2003


End of Document