Vibrant democracies can help fight terrorism
USA TODAY
January 29, 2010 Friday
FINAL EDITION


Copyright 2010 Gannett Company, Inc. All Rights Reserved
Section: NEWS; Pg. 7A
Length: 490 words
Body


Our psychological sensitivity to human terrorism and our vulnerability to incitement over race, religion and nationality could be distracting us from more menacing and lethal technical threats. In the case of transportation, these include missile, freight, electronic or electro-magnetic sources, which can also disrupt any number of other vulnerable targets, such as utilities ("What's our next terror threat?," Cover story, News, Tuesday).
These terrorism threats can also come from a number of highly sophisticated organizations, including First World nation sponsors and not just "jihadist" ones.
Terror, in all its forms, has been occurring for thousands of years. The next threat is largely unknown but  will always be a product of desperation or unchecked power.
The most dangerous security threat is not one that can be deterred by intelligence or technology, but by active democracy alone.
Matt Andersson, president
Indigo Aerospace
Chicago
U.S. provokes war
USA TODAY's article "What's our next terror threat"  was dangerous propaganda. It served only to keep the country in perpetual fear and in total darkness about the U.S. role in creating that terrorist threat. Yes, the United States and its closest ally, Israel, are largely responsible for provoking terrorism by imposing criminal wars against the Palestinians and Iraq. This is common knowledge everywhere except in the U.S.
Most of America's current economic, debt, security and military problems are due in large part to our war with terrorists. Many believe we could remove the reason for these terror wars by bringing justice to the Palestinians and rethinking U.S. policy in the Middle East.
Israel and the U.S. refuse to do this, as is now quite evident. Unending terrorist war seems quite acceptable to  both regardless of the cost. This, of course, is madness.
America has not the guts to stand up for itself or to Israel at a time when our people are being killed and maimed to keep us safe. We should be deeply ashamed as Americans.
Malcolm D. McPhee
Sequim, Wash.
Criminal court is fitting
Why all the debate about trying terrorists in U.S. criminal courts? Trying them in military tribunals as enemy combatants only plays into their fantasies of being "holy warriors" in some twisted crusade ("The justice system works," Opposing view, Balancing security and justice debate, Jan. 20).
Any coward who bombs men, women and children in a marketplace, hotel or airplane is nothing but a thug, a gangster and a criminal. Let him be tried as such.
Robin Van Liew
Holden, Mass.
Lost chance on Christmas
Why didn't we get more information from the Muslim terrorist who tried to use a  bomb sewn into his underwear to take down a passenger plane on Christmas ("Question terrorists first," Our view)?
Who is responsible for giving this guy a lawyer so he would shut up?
This lost opportunity could result in other tragedies. What are we going to do to change this?
Russ Stabley
Fort Lauderdale 

Graphic

 
PHOTO, B/W, File photo by Dana Verkouteren, AP

Load-Date: January 29, 2010


End of Document