VICE PRESIDENT CHENEY VISITS MOORHEAD;
Cheney goes after Kerry on terrorism;
The forum was the vice president's seventh trip to the state. At least one more is planned.
Star Tribune (Minneapolis, MN)
October 26, 2004, Tuesday, Metro Edition


Copyright 2004 Star Tribune
Section: NEWS; Pg. 10A
Length: 638 words
Byline: Bob von Sternberg; Staff Writer
Dateline: Moorhead, Minn.
Body


Vice President Dick Cheney was dissecting John Kerry's record in the Senate on Monday morning when he tried to sum up, saying "the problem, I think here, is … "
     "He's a liar!" yelled one of several hundred people who attended a campaign stop in the field house at Minnesota State University-Moorhead, interrupting Cheney in mid-sentence.
     "Now the press is going to attribute that to me," Cheney said with a grin as the crowd roared in delight.
     It was one of the few moments, during an hour-long meeting, in which Cheney let his focus stray from relentlessly hammering Kerry on terrorism and homeland security.
     Cheney said the United States will be less safe under a Kerry administration than it would be if President Bush is reelected a week from today.
   "You know what George Bush will do," he said. "He's the guy who came up with the [anti-terror] strategy. The question before the house is what does John Kerry bring to this equation? He's got a 20-year record in the Senate and you can go back and look at that record and see how he's dealt with national security issues … George Bush has a strategy. John Kerry doesn't."
     'Just a nuisance?'
     Cheney mocked Kerry's stated hope that terrorism can ultimately be brought under enough control that it can be considered a nuisance, akin to prostitution and legalized gambling.
     "When was terror ever just a nuisance?" he demanded. "You haven't really come to grips with the nature of our adversary. You have a pre-9/11 mindset. You need a post-9/11 mindset."
     Cheney did not mention Bush's comment, in a Fox News Channel interview, that "Whether or not we can be ever fully safe is up - you know, up in the air. I would hope we could make it a lot more safe by staying on the offensive."
     After the meeting, during an interview on a local radio talk show, Cheney was asked whether international terrorists are rooting for a Bush defeat Nov. 2. Cheney replied: "I haven't talked to many international terrorists recently, but they understand George Bush. … It's clear they'd prefer some other option."
     Cheney's wife, Lynne, who shared the stage with him, also derided the Democratic ticket's ability to protect the nation. "Who do I want standing in the doorway when the terrorists arrive?" she asked. "Absolutely the answer is George Bush. It's sure not John Kerry and John Edwards."
     After his remarks, Cheney fielded a handful of questions from audience members on subjects ranging from the Red River Valley's sugar beet industry to charter schools to the Democrats' charge that a reelected Bush administration could reinstitute the draft ("It's hogwash, that's the best way I can describe it," Cheney said).
     The vice president's seventh stop in Minnesota was virtually identical in tone and content to the previous six. So was the opposition, made up Monday of roughly 30 protesters chanting, "eight more days!"
     Minnesota DFL Chairman Mike Erlandson issued a statement saying that Cheney refused "to discuss George Bush's record of failure and his own lifetime record of protecting the powerful and the well-connected, including the corporate elite at Halliburton. Cheney's record is one of failure, and of refusing to tell people the truth about Iraq, the economy and the war on terror."
     In testimony to Minnesota's emergence as a toss-up state this year, Cheney will be back at least one more time, as will Bush, said Sen. Norm Coleman, co-chairman of the Minnesota Bush-Cheney campaign.
     Coleman warmed up members of the crowd for Cheney, telling them that "for the first time in 32 years, Minnesota is going to go Republican in this election. You have the opportunity to make history … if you give this president and vice president the next eight days of your life."
     Bob von Sternberg is at vonste@startribune.com  

Graphic

 
PHOTO

Load-Date: October 27, 2004


End of Document