VICTIM A HERO, KILLER A FOOL, AND FOR THE REST, UNMEANING PAIN
The New York Times
May 14, 1981, Thursday, Late City Final Edition


Copyright 1981 The New York Times Company
Section: Section A; Page 5, Column 1; Foreign Desk
Length: 1042 words
Body


With expressions of abhorrence and shock and puzzled lamentations about the nature of irrationality that would impel an attack on a holy man, eminent writers, philosophers and theologians reacted yesterday to the attempt on the life of Pope John Paul II.
Archibald MacLeish
Poet and playwright, speaking from his home in Conway, Mass.
There was a time when an assassin was at least the Brutus of the play shouting something about tyrants as the deed was done. Now he shouts nothing because he does not speak the tongue and never heard the word for tyrant and cares for nothing but himself. The victim is the hero now, the statesman with his laughing courage, the Pope with his warm human love, but the murderer is nothing - not a madman even - just a fool. And our generation, degraded by a clatter of unmeaning pain, makes panic of what should be tragedy.
Eminent writers, philosophers and theologians express reactions to assassination attempt on life of Pope John Paul IIIsaac Bashevis Singer
Polish-born writer and winner of the Nobel Prize for Literature
I'm absolutely shocked because here is a man with such good will.  What reason could there be to hurt such a man? Every kind of killing or shooting, when I hear about it, it really shocks me. There are important people and less important, but when it comes to life and death every human being is dear to me. I tell you the truth, I feel that we are living in Sodom and Gomorrah. What has happened to humanity?
Muriel Spark
Scots-born novelist who has lived in Italy 14 years
We're used to terrorism and violence here, but everyone's still very upset and stunned. I'm in the country, in a small village two hours from Rome, and we've heard the church bells ringing, coming across the olive groves, calling the people to church to pray for the Pope. Everyone feels a sense of shock and disappointment. A Pope has very little security, he doesn't have even Presidential security, which we know isn't enough. And this Pope loves to go among the people, to mingle with the crowds. I hope he can continue to do that, only now with a little better protection. Somehow democracy has got to be made to work.
Czeslaw Milosz
Polish-born poet and winner of the 1980 Nobel Prize for Literature, from his office at the University of California at Berkeley
I'm not sure I know what to say, I'm still so puzzled and depressed by it. I wonder what are the limits of irrationality. I don't understand. I just don't understand.
William F. Buckley Jr.
Author, commentator and editor
A believing Christian necessarily reacts by wondering what on earth the Lord is up to. The allure of the present Pope almost compels the answer ''No good,'' but that's just the answer the present Pope would be the first to disavow. So we blame mankind for the shooting, and thank God for the recovery.
Theodore M. Hesburgh
President of the University of Notre Dame
It's incomprehensible why anyone should try to harm a gentle, Holy Father so totally given to seeking justice and peace in this world.  We see terrorism run amok, but generally in the name of seeking justice and peace, however misguided. This insane act should at long last, I believe, turn the world at large against terrorism and make terrorists outlawed on the whole face of the earth. It seems to me there is no semblance of justification for terrorists now that they have aimed at one of the greatest apostles of justice and peace in this world.
Clare Boothe Luce
Playwright and Ambassador to Italy from 1952-1957, from her home in Hawaii
This Pope never preached anything but love, peace and selfrestraint. It's tragic to think that an attack on him is an attack on all that is peaceful and rational. I don't know who attacked him but it has to be an example of the irrational and unreasonable religious hatred that seems at this moment to be sweeping the world toward a tremendous disaster. There is nothing, in my view, that can be done about terrorism, except of course to guard potential targets more carefully. But terrorism itself is a sign that order and authority are breaking down within nations as well as between nations. That's what's making it a matter of such tremendous importance for every country in the world - and none more than the United States, because the recent assassination attempt on our own President is proof that the terrorism we've seen in Europe is sweeping our way.
Hugh Leonard
Irish playwright, speaking from Dublin
There's total disbelief around here. As for my reaction - and I don't think it's a solitary one - the whole situation in Northern Ireland created such a climate that I'm not in the least surprised.  It's part of a general insanity. Reagan, the Pope - it all stems from the same thing, an intention to prove that there's nobody that cannot be shot down. A weird logic. I went to a pub for a beer around six o'clock and that's where I heard about it. Everybody was absolutely stunned. I made the remark that it keeps the heat off Northern Ireland and the Provisionals, and people nodded. They're not able to talk about it.
James O'Gara
Editor of Commonweal magazine, the independent Catholic lay-edited biweekly, in New York
In a world of senseless killing, the Pope now suffers as one more victim. Acts like this dramatize his exceptional character. To be reminded this way of his possible demise is also to be reminded what a unique person he is, of how difficult it would be for anyone who would have to try to fill his shoes. I pray it will not come to that. Running through his unusual mixture of conservatism and liberalism, traditional convictions and remarkable departures from custom and prerogatives, is a sense of vitality that I hope will carry him through this tragic event.
Elie Wiesel
Teacher, author and survivor of the Holocaust, who was lecturing in Cincinnati yesterday
I was shocked but not surprised. It fits the pattern of the violent times we live in. My immediate reaction was once again, again, again, again. It is the age of violence, and now the violence is reaching into the highest levels. You can not have a continuous state of war in Ireland or a continuous state of war in Lebanon or a continuous state of fear in other countries without the explosion of many dark, subterranean forces. It's an act of insanity.


End of Document