Victory in war on terrorism depends on small successes;
This is a long-term struggle that requires a relentless commitment.
Portland Press Herald (Maine)
November 28, 2003 Friday, FINAL Edition


Copyright 2003 Blethen Maine Newspapers, Inc.
Section: EDITORIAL; Pg. 14A
Length: 266 words
Body


They may not seem like much, but there have been a series of small victories in the war on terrorism this week.
In Istanbul, Turkey, nine people have been charged in connection with suicide bomb attacks on British targets in that country.
The defendants are charged as accomplices of the two suicide bombers who struck a British consulate and a London-based bank.
In Yemen, a top al-Qaida leader, believed to be instrumental in the bombing of the USS Cole that killed 17 Americans in 2000, was arrested. Mohammed Hamdi al-Ahdal is thought to have been second-in-command for the terrorist group in Yemen. His boss in the organization was killed a year ago by an unmanned military drone operated by the CIA.
Also in the Middle East, officials in Saudi Arabia thwarted a plot to set off a car bomb in the Saudi capital. Two suspected terrorists were killed in a shoot-out as part of that action.
Finally, here in the United States, law enforcement officials report good progress in getting information from six Yemeni-Americans who recently pleaded guilty to aiding al-Qaida.
None of these developments by themselves represents a huge step forward in eliminating the threat of global terrorism. The al-Qaida network is vast, and as any one terrorist is killed or arrested another is likely to rise up in his place.
Still, it is with these small victories that the war on terrorism will be won. This is a long-term struggle that will likely go on even after al-Qaida's leader, Osama bin Laden, is captured or killed. The important thing is that the civilized world not relent in its pursuit of these terrorists.

Graphic

 
The Associated Press
Nine terrorists are being charged after this attack in Turkey.

Load-Date: November 28, 2003


End of Document