Victims of terrorism still waiting for justice
USA TODAY
October 25, 1999, Monday,
FINAL EDITION


Copyright 1999 Gannett Company, Inc.
Section: NEWS;
Length: 740 words
Byline: Connie Mack
Body


Not long ago, a stretch limousine pulled up in front of the federal
courthouse in Jacksonville, Fla., where American families were
seeking justice for their loved ones who had been murdered by
the Cuban government. As a small crowd watched, U.S. State Department
lawyers stepped out of the limo, entered the courthouse -- and
defended the Cuban government.
I know people must be thinking this cannot be true. It is true.
In 1996, President Clinton signed a law that allows Americans
harmed by terrorist acts to seek justice in U.S. federal courts
against the responsible countries. The law, which Clinton signed
with a great public display of enthusiasm, gives victims' families
the ability to tap into the U.S. assets of countries, such as
Cuba, that support international terrorism.
Legal response to Cuba's downing of plane
The law was a response to the Cuban Air Force's killing earlier
that year of four men, three of them U.S. citizens, who were flying
in unarmed airplanes over international waters. The men were on
a humanitarian search for people stranded in rafts between Florida
and Cuba. Clinton condemned the killings and encouraged the families
to seek justice through the courts. He also asked Congress "to
pass legislation authorizing payment of compensation to the families
of victims out of blocked Cuban accounts in New York."
So the Americans' families, using the law Clinton signed, went
to court and were awarded $ 187 million by a federal judge. But
then the president broke faith with these families: He has thwarted
their attempts to collect any of that money.
That is not the only terrorism case in which the president promised
justice, then helped block it. In 1995, Alisa Flatow of New Jersey,
a college junior visiting Israel, was killed when her bus was
rammed by a carload of explosives. The government of Iran backed
the terrorist group that rammed her bus.
President and Mrs. Clinton called Alisa's father to express their
sorrow and pledge their support for justice. Her father, Stephen
Flatow, says the president encouraged him to file a lawsuit against
Iran, calling it "brave and courageous."
In 1998, a U.S. court found the government of Iran responsible
for the murder of Alisa Flatow and ordered her family paid $ 247.5
million. But, when the family tried to reach Iranian assets frozen
in this country, the president blocked it.
In both cases, the president has claimed a "national security"
reason for keeping the families away from the frozen assets, saying
they were needed as leverage in negotiations with terrorist regimes.
But of what negotiating use are these assets if terrorists' countries
know their victims' families can't get at them? The Clinton administration
also claims that releasing the terrorist nations' assets would
subject U.S. assets to erroneous claims overseas or interfere
with the United States' ability to abide by its international
obligations. No such interference exists. But even if it did,
why the promises to the families and the request to Congress to
pass the law in the first place?
Empty promises to victims' families
The president betrayed these American families. It is that simple.
Words can be easily said; it is one's actions that matter.
There are more cases. Americans David Jacobsen, Joseph Cicippio
and Terry Anderson all were taken hostage by Iran-funded terrorist
groups in Lebanon during the 1980s. Jacobsen, help captive for
17 months, and Cicippio, a hostage for more than five years, haven't
collected any of the Iranian millions a federal court awarded
them. Anderson, held more than six years, seeks $ 100 million from
Iran; will he ever see it? And now that the families of the 1988
Pan Am Flight 103 murder victims have filed suit for billions
against Libya, what will President Clinton do? Join forces with
Moammar Gadhafi in court to defeat them?
This U.S. government's embarrassment could be over tomorrow. The
president has the authority -- indeed, the obligation -- to respect
the rule of law and the power of the courts. He made promises
to the families, he pledged to fight terrorism, and he signed
several laws that support the rights of victims to take terrorists
to court.
By now, we all know the deplorable story of Clinton's decision
to offer clemency to 16 Puerto Rican terrorists -- even though,
it appears, the terrorists themselves feel little, if any, remorse.
What kind of message are we sending when the U.S. government protects
terrorists from U.S. law -- and denies justice to American citizens?

Graphic

 
PHOTO, b/w, AP; Alisa Flatow: Killed in Gaza Strip bombing in 1995.

Load-Date: October 25, 1999


End of Document