VIDEO FESTIVAL ATTEMPTS TO DEFINE, ANALYZE TERRORISM
Pittsburgh Post-Gazette (Pennsylvania)
March 5, 2005 Saturday
REGION EDITION


Copyright 2005 P.G. Publishing Co.
Section: ARTS & ENTERTAINMENT,
Length: 358 words
Byline: John Hayes Pittsburgh Post-Gazette
Body


Tuesday morning, Sept. 11, is a moment that Andres Tapia-Urzua will never forget. The senseless death, the paranoia, the hysteria. It was the day in 1973 in his native Chile when a CIA-backed military coup toppled the popularly elected Salvador Allende and installed the oppressive regime of Gen. Augusto Pinochet.
Was it terrorism? Perhaps the coup was not, although some of Pinochet's later actions and those of his opponents fit the popular description. Even after America's Sept. 11 -- 28 years later to the day -- government and the news media have struggled to define what is essentially the unconventional military tactic of an ideology, not an ideology itself. Hence the difficulty in coming to grips with a worldwide "war on terror."
 Tapia-Urzua, who has lived in the United States since 1986, believes terrorism can be more clearly defined through the subjective language of art.
 In "My Terrorism Video Festival" at Pittsburgh Filmmakers in Oakland, Tapia-Urzua compiles 15 video shorts from around the world in an effort to categorize, define and analyze terrorism. While he says none of the artists advocate terrorism violence, their perceptions are frequently at odds with those of the world's governments and mass media.
 "I grew up under Pinochet in Chile, so I know something of terrorism and its many levels," he says. "There is political terrorism, state terrorism, religious terrorism, criminal terrorism. Some people in America see the Oklahoma City bombing as something besides domestic terrorism.
 "And there's always the question, are they terrorists or freedom fighters, and if you challenge your government, they call you a terrorist."
 Tapia-Urzua includes his own work and shorts presenting "very different perspectives" by videographers from Israel, Canada and Latin America.
 "We want to analyze terrorism and how it works," he says, "and how governments use their definitions of terrorism to their own benefit. I hope people will say, 'I never saw it that way before.' "
 'My Terrorism Video Festival'
 * WHERE: Melwood Screening Room, Pittsburgh Filmmakers, Oakland.
 * WHEN: 8 tonight.
 * TICKETS: $5, students $4; 412-682-4111.

Notes

John Hayes can be reached at jhayes@post-gazette.com or 412-263-1991.  

Graphic

 
Avi Winger in Andres Tapia-Urzua's "Terminil," which will be featured in tonight's "My Terrorism Film Festival.

Load-Date: March 5, 2005


End of Document