VIETNAM AND TERRORISM ASSAILED BY SPEAKERS AT THE UNITED NATIONS - Correction Appended
The New York Times


 Correction Appended

Copyright 1986 The New York Times Company
Section: Section A; Page 4, Column 3; Foreign Desk
Length: 420 words
Byline: By HOWARD W. FRENCH, Special to the New York Times
Dateline: UNITED NATIONS, N.Y., Sept. 30
Body


Prince Norodom Sihanouk head of an exiled coalition fighting to oust the Vietnamese from Cambodia, denounced Vietnam today for its ''illegal occupation'' of his country.
The Prince, the first of 11 speakers today before the General Assembly, credited international support for the coalition fighting the Vietnamese-backed Government of Heng Samrin with preventing ''more than 70,000 Vietnamese settlers'' from making his country ''vanish from the world map.''
The Foreign Minister of Thailand, Siddhi Savetsila, also condemned Vietnam's ''illegal occupation.''
The Israeli Foreign Minister, Yitzhak Shamir, said that the only way to achieve Middle East peace is through ''direct negotiations'' with Israel, not an international conference. Mr. Shamir's appearance on the podium prompted the usual walkout of a number of Arab and other delegations.
 
Terrorism Condemned
Austria's Foreign Minister, Peter Jankowitsch, deplored the use of violence in the resolution of international disputes, calling terrorism ''the new and brutal form of violence.''
Hungary's Foreign Minister, Peter Varkonyi, said it is in the ''vital interest of all member states'' that conflicts be settled through negotiation.
Albania's Foreign Minister, Reis Malile, assailed the ''two superpowers,'' saying, ''They are constantly in a fever to invent, produce and deploy qualitatively new weapons with ever greater power of extermination.''
The Foreign Minister of Belize, Dean O. Barrow, said that his country ''welcomes the return to civilian rule'' in neighboring Guatemala ''as a forerunner to the normalization of relations between our two countries.''
Qatar's Foreign Minister, Sheik Ahmed Bin Saif al-Thani, called for a strengthening of the United Nations, urging that members ''abide by the principles'' of the Charter.
President Denis Sassou-Nguesso of Congo, speaking on behalf of the Organization of African Unity, said the two priorities for Africa were economic development and the abolition of apartheid in South Africa.
Jamaica's Foreign Minister, Oswald G. Harding, condemned South Africa's ''latest attempts designed to further entrench its illegal presence in Namibia,'' also known as South-West Africa.
Zaire's Foreign Minister, Mandungu Bula Nyati, criticized the economic measures proposed by the International Monetary Fund. He said I.M.F. policy should ''take more into account the needs of economic and social development of our countries rather than pursuing a policy which could at present be construed as a new form of colonialism.''
Correction

A United Nations dispatch on Oct. 1 about a speech by Prince Norodom Sihanouk, who heads the exiled coalition fighting to oust the Vietnamese from Cambodia, misstated the figure he used for Vietnamese settlers in Cambodia. He said there were more than 700,000.
Correction-Date: October 18, 1986, Saturday, Late City Final Edition


End of Document