Views on JFK, Arafat and Big Brother; ON YOUR MIND
Dayton Daily News (Ohio)
November 19, 2013 Tuesday


Copyright 2013 Dayton Newspapers, Inc.
Section: IDEAS & VOICES; Pg. A7
Length: 592 words
Body


Letters to the editor
up 'Conspirary for 50 years covered '
Re "Who murdered the president?," Nov. 5: I was an 18-year-old Air Force recruit in November 1963 and, for 50 years, have been a firm believer that one man could not have pulled off what Lee Harvey Oswald did on that fateful day.
He was a dupe, installed by a conspiracy that has been covered up for 50 years. He supposedly committed this crime with a rifle that was not even trusted in pre-World War II days and (it) could not be duplicated by top FBI shooters, using the same rifle. Thus, the magic bullet theory or another shooter.
The Warren Commission came up with their conclusion with the evidence presented because not all the evidence was presented. One man could not have accomplished this feat. (It was a) government conspiracy, just as the present-day Benghazi cover-up. Frank Laning, HUBER
HEIGHTS
'Arafat the father of modern terrorism'
Re "Examiners: Arafat likely poisoned," Nov. 7: Reporter Carol J. Williams of the Los Angeles Times stated that (among) the chief suspects in the death of Yasser Arafat were Israeli officials who branded the Palestine Liberation Organization leader as a terrorist, as if that was merely an Israeli opinion, not a fact.
In truth, Arafat was the father of modern terrorism, and he proved to the world that it works. His reward was a Nobel Prize for Peace. He began his career with bombing and hijacking civilian aircraft, moved on to murdering Israeli athletes at the Munich Olympics, soaked his hands with blood by attacking schoolchildren and buses in Israel, and provided the world with a concept that we are confronting today.
At first, the target of the Arafat style of murder was Jews, but it was quickly emulated by Muslims throughout the world. Now both Shia and Sunni Muslims terrorize each other, Christians, Buddhists, Animists, Americans, Africans and other people who they have denominated as "infidels" throughout the world.
Unfortunately, the European Union and our State Department believe that the PLO, now known as the Palestinian Authority, is a trustworthy negotiating partner for Israel. I think not.
To this day, their children are taught to hate and kill Jews, who they describe as the "sons of apes and pigs." Incidentally, the circumstantial evidence for radioactive poisoning points to the Russians who employed it to kill one of their own, not to Israel.
DENNIS PATTERSON, CLAYTON
An 'easier' method to track mileage
Re "Black boxes in cars spur debate," Nov. 4: Understanding the need to balance privacy, and other concerns, against tax dollars for roads - wouldn't an easier and more cost-effective solution be to have odometer readings be a part of the state's annual license plate renewal process - rather than installing dashboard black boxes to track each and every mile driven?
Beginning and ending mileage for a 12-month period could easily be recorded. Checks and balances could occur through periodic audits, random odometer readings and reconciliations at the time of a vehicle's purchase, trade-in and/or scrapping.
No need, then, for "Big Brother" to be riding along with us for every mile of every day.
JAN SCHULTZ, DAYTON
Speak Up
The same Democrat-led Senate that said "you can keep your health plan if you like it" is back again with a huge immigration bill that nobody has read. The only thing sure about the bill is that the parts that legalize undocumented Democrats will be enforced and the border security part will not. President Obama and his Justice Department cannot be trusted. Rep. John Boehner knows that and so

Load-Date: November 19, 2013


End of Document