Viewers Could Judge Abu Abbas for Themselves
The New York Times
May 25, 1986, Sunday, Late City Final Edition


Copyright 1986 The New York Times Company
Section: Section 4; Page 16, Column 5; Editorial Desk; Letter
Length: 297 words
Body


To the Editor:
I hope Jerry Arbittier shows more common sense and respect for facts as chairman of the Klinghoffer Foundation than as a letter writer (May 18). Mr. Arbittier complained that NBC News did not help arrest the terrorist Abu Abbas when he was ''within its grasp.'' NBC News did not capture Abu Abbas. We are neither a national intelligence service nor a law-enforcement agency. We do not have the authority or the ability to arrest fugitives. Our role is to report news.
Abu Abbas is a leader of international terrorism. His intentions, attitudes and plans are important for the American people to know and understand. As was obvious to anyone who saw our reports, NBC News did not give Mr. Abbas the ''unchallenged forum'' that Mr. Arbittier claimed he had. Tom Brokaw ended the report on the Abbas interview this way: ''As to the claim of Abu Abbas that his men didn't shoot Leon Klinghoffer to death, eyewitnesses on the ship described the murder by the hijackers of Klinghoffer, who was in a wheelchair at the time.''
When Edward R. Murrow conducted the first television interviews with China's Chou En-lai and Yugoslavia's Marshal Tito, similar cries of outrage were heard from those with little respect for the American public's ability to sort right from wrong.
Today, unlike the past, Americans are prime targets of terrorism. It is essential that we know who our enemies are and know what we are up against. Ignorance and censorship are no service to a democratic society. As chairman of the Klinghoffer Memorial Foundation, Mr. Arbittier should demonstrate some faith in the capacity of the public to judge Abu Abbas for itself and assess for itself the real dangers of terrorism in this world. LAWRENCE K. GROSSMAN President, News Division, NBC New York, May 20, 1986


End of Document