Vigilant and realistic
Deseret Morning News (Salt Lake City)
December 17, 2014 Wednesday


Copyright 2014 The Deseret News Publishing Co.
Length: 596 words
Body


When Islamic State group militants issued a statement urging supporters worldwide to launch attacks against the Western nations in which they reside, it was a shrewd move.
Terrorists generally try hard to appear more numerous and omnipresent than they are. In the case of the Islamic State group, the narrative is believable, given recent publicity about recruiting efforts in the United States and elsewhere as well as stories of how officials in Western governments fret over their own citizens joining ranks with terrorists, then returning home with still-valid passports.
It also gave just about any troubled or psychotic soul desiring to take hostages or commit mass murder an immediate vehicle to fame and attention. The Islamic State group itself doesn't even have to claim a connection to horrible crimes in order to raise suspicions. Suddenly, its footprint in the world seems much larger; its presence lurking behind each shadow.
The world may never know for sure whether Man Haron Monis, the man reportedly behind the long and deadly standoff at a Lindt Café in Sydney, Australia, really was a "lone wolf" acting under orders or funding from the Islamic State group. He apparently believed in a radical form of Islam, which he expressed through writings on a flag he posted in the café's window. But he also was known to local law enforcement as a criminal who had been convicted of several crimes.
The same uncertainties surround Michael Zehaf-Bibeau, who killed an honor guard outside the Canadian Parliament in October before attempting to storm the building and ultimately dying at the hands of the sergeant at arms. A subsequent Islamic State group-produced video featuring a man from Ottawa referenced that crime while calling on Canadians to carry out more lone-wolf attacks.
Surely, there are plenty of radical fanatics in the world willing to act violently out of a warped sense of religious devotion. And yet, there is no evidence that crimes of this sort, whether at the hands of Islamic State group-led warriors or merely troubled individuals, are on the rise. The fear of them is, however.
Surely, all local police departments need to train and be on the lookout for similar attacks that could terrorize and potentially kill people. But as former terrorism investigator Scott Stewart wrote in a piece published by the investigative firm Strafor and policeone.com, even lone-wolf terrorists are not mythical creatures that spontaneously generate in the shadows. He wrote, "... the lone attacker still must follow and complete all the steps of the attack cycle when planning and executing an attack, therefore making themselves vulnerable to detection."
Good policing, combined with the eyes and ears of an alert public, can keep law enforcement a step ahead of such people.
Perspective is vital when it comes to dealing with terrorists. If Americans surrender too many freedoms in the name of security, the terrorists will have gained a victory of sorts. The spying being done by the National Security Agency already calls into question whether too much has been sacrificed.
Certainly, radical terrorism poses a threat to world security. Too many brave men and women already have been lost on battlefields where al-Qaida, the Islamic State group, the Taliban and adherents to other violent ideologies hold sway. Too many innocent lives, such as those who were shopping at the Lindt Café at the wrong time, have been lost.
Vigilance must be the constant watchword, but it must be coupled with a realistic perspective that keeps the civilized world from overreacting.

Load-Date: December 17, 2014


End of Document