Vigilance helps curb terrorism
Telegraph Herald (Dubuque, IA)
September 11, 2011 Sunday


Copyright 2011 Woodward Communications, Inc. All Rights Reserved
Section: A; Pg. 14
Length: 450 words
Byline: the TH Editorial Board
Body


where we stand Dedicated law enforcement and greater awareness have led to foiled acts of terrorism. "O beautiful for patriot dream That sees beyond the years Thine alabaster cities gleam Undimmed by human tears." A decade after the 9/11 attacks, we live in a changed America. 
When the words of Katharine Lee Bates and the music of Samuel A. Ward were combined to compose "America the Beautiful" a century ago, Bates saw the promise of the future in the alabaster high-rises going up in big cities. Today, we would not portray those cities as "undimmed by human tears." Ten years after the worst terrorist strike ever on American soil, the tears that have been shed are as countless as the number of lives that have been impacted by the tragedy. In this weekend's editions of the Telegraph Herald, we are telling those stories of impact and how they connect to people in the tri-state area. They range from those who were present and witnessed attacks, to children who don't even remember Sept. 11, 2001, but whose lives have been affected nonetheless. All of us experience the consequences of a post-9/11 world every time we board a commercial aircraft. The scrutiny of our belongings and our bodies has become an accepted reality as a measure of safety. When then-President George W. Bush declared a "war on terror," there were skeptics who wondered whether fighting such an intangible enemy could be fruitful. A decade later, we have seen the fruits of that pursuit. Worldwide, more than 35,000 people have been convicted as terrorists in the decade since 9/11. Some of them bombed hotels or blew up buses, while others were convicted of lesser charges. In the United States, convictions on terrorism charges were eight times higher than in the decade before 9/11. More than 30 terrorist plots against the United States have been thwarted since 9/11. In most cases, it is law enforcement that has identified and foiled planned attacks. But the heroes also include airline passengers and flight attendants who subdued the so-called "shoe bomber" in 2001 and the "underwear bomber" in 2009. Clearly, a heightened sense of awareness has contributed to creating a safer nation. Imagine how many more disasters could have occurred had we not been vigilant in ferreting out terrorism plots and reacting to suspicious behaviors. We should pause today to remember those who died in the attacks of 9/11, and all those left in the wake of the tragedy. We are reminded that the inconveniences we endure in the name of security have helped us to remain vigilant against terrorism. As for our great nation, "God shed his grace on thee." Editorials reflect the consensus of the Telegraph Herald Editorial Board.

Load-Date: September 22, 2011


End of Document