Vilsack: 90% of terrorism targets not state-controlled
Telegraph Herald (Dubuque, IA)
March 12, 2002 Tuesday


Copyright 2002 Woodward Communications, Inc.
Section: Pg. a11
Length: 337 words
Byline: ASSOCIATED PRESS
Dateline: DES MOINES
Body


In the six months since terrorist attacks, state officials have nearly completed an inventory of potential terrorism targets and have found that 90 percent of those targets are not under the state's control, Gov. Tom Vilsack said Monday.
Vilsack said officials were working with federal officials to develop more sophisticated methods of uncovering terrorist threats and to develop closer relations with the owners of those potential targets.
"We need to encourage them to trust us with their security plans," the governor said.
Officials refused to discuss any details of the inventory and a measure was pending in the Iowa Legislature that specifically would exempt the list from public-records laws.
The governor used the anniversary to report on the "coordinated and comprehensive strategy" the state has followed in responding.
"Quite a bit has taken place," Vilsack said. He noted that 2,200 Iowa National Guard troops were called to duty at one point or another in the crisis, with 800 still on active duty.
In addition, the state got a $$ @12.8 million federal grant to help guard against bioterrorism, with $$ @11.5 million to build hospitals or expand current ones. Health officials worry the system is inadequate to handle a surge of patients. 
The other $$ @1.3 million will be used to upgrade laboratories critical in detecting bioterrorism. 
Vilsack has included $$ @1 million in his proposed 2003 state budget for homeland security, and he noted that President Bush has included $$ @3.5 billion in the federal budget to help state and local governments pay for security costs. 
While that's welcome, Vilsack said, it will barely cover the actual costs, which include overtime for police and firefighters and other security steps.
At the recent National Governors' Association meeting, Iowa was among seven states and one territory chosen to participate in an academy to develop strategies for responding to terrorism. The others chosen are:Georgia, Indiana, Pennsylvania, Ohio, Utah, West Virginia and the Virgin Islands.

Load-Date: March 16, 2002


End of Document