VINE OF ISLAMIC MILITANCY TAKES ROOT IN SUDAN
Pittsburgh Post-Gazette (Pennsylvania)
June 27, 1993, Sunday,
FIVE STAR EDITION


Copyright 1993 P.G. Publishing Co.
Section: WORLD,
Length: 615 words
Byline: RUTH SINAI, THE ASSOCIATED PRESS
Body


On a sweltering day in July 1990, a blind, barefoot Muslim cleric entered the U.S. Embassy in Khartoum, capital of Sudan, and got a permit to visit the United States.
Among the followers Sheik Omar Abdel-Rahman has since attracted in this country are five Sudanese arrested in a thwarted plot to unleash massive bombings on New York City.
Sudan, like Iran, is formally ruled according to Islamic law and is a busy breeding ground for the spread of Islamic militancy.
Although Sudan's government has not carried out any terrorist attacks itself, the United States has several times in recent months considered placing it on a list of countries supporting terrorism.
It's a case of guilt by association, say U.S. officials, who note that Sudan is hosting a growing number of Iranian-sponsored terrorist groups.
''The United States is very disturbed by the close relationship that Sudan has developed with Iran,'' State Department spokesman Mike McCurry said on Friday. ''We know that Iran is a leading sponsor of international terrorism.''
The relationship with Tehran began to develop soon after Iraq lost the Persian Gulf war and was no longer able to help its ally, Sudan.
Sudan's military government, which had overthrown civilian rulers in a 1989 coup, quickly turned to Iran where it found an eager benefactor.
Soon after, Iranian President Hashemi Rafsanjani visited Khartoum and Sudan's government announced the imposition of Islamic law. Women were to don veils and courts were to practice according to the Koran, Islam's holy book.
''The present military government … has pursued religiously extremist policies,'' says the U.S. State Department's 1992 human rights report, which documents an aggressive drive to impose Islamic laws on Sudan's 25 million people.
This drive, and increasing evidence of severe human rights violations, further strained U.S.-Sudanese relations, resulting in a cutoff of all U.S. military aid and in the government's Nov. 3, 1992, ban of all U.S. commercial weapons exports to Sudan.
Meanwhile, Iran was providing millions of dollars to build Islamic centers, and has sent several hundred elite military troops to train an ideologically motivated, Muslim paramilitary force called the Popular Defense Force.
The Iranian Revolutionary Guards also began using Sudan as a base to train Muslim cadres from Tunisia, Egypt and Algeria so they can overthrow their secular governments and install Islamic rule, say U.S. and Israeli officials.
Sudan has offered offices and training facilities for several Iranian- backed terrorist groups, among them the Lebanon-based Hezbollah, or Party of God, as well as the Palestinian groups Hamas and Islamic Jihad, according to the State Department.
This helped Iran at a time when it was being forced to find a new home for some of its protege terrorist groups because Syria, under strong pressure from the United States, was shutting down some terrorist training facilities in Lebanon's Bekaa Valley.
Also enjoying Sudanese hospitality are members of the Libyan-financed Abu Nidal organization, a Palestinian terrorist organization which has been largely inactive in recent years, the State Department says.
In return for hosting these groups, Sudan has asked for -- and received -- weapons and training for its campaign to crush the non-Muslim rebels in southern Sudan with whom the government has been locked in a deadly war since the 1970s.
Iran already has sent Sudan six combat aircraft, according to Israeli and U.S. officials.
Iran also agreed to pay China $ 300 million for weapons for Sudan, according to Mohammad Mohaddessin, a top Iranian opposition leader who has just published a book on Iran's export of its Islamic revolution.

Load-Date: September 20, 1995


End of Document