Violent history can change with tolerance
University Wire
October 12, 2005 Wednesday


Copyright 2005 The News Record via U-Wire
Section: COLUMN
Length: 578 words
Byline: By Joshua Rinaldi, The News Record; SOURCE: U. Cincinnati
Dateline: CINCINNATI 
Body


You can't please everyone.
That fact was made abundantly clear to me as I toured Israel during the Gaza disengagement in August.
People who opposed the plan wore orange wristbands. The Jerusalem Post was filled with stories of protests and tales of what the Israeli troops had to deal with that day.
I actually had dinner with an Israeli soldier and his family for Shabbat, the Friday night dinner after synagogue. He told me that just that day, he had been called a Nazi three times.
Obviously, in a Jewish state that charge must carry a lot more weight than if someone uttered it around here.
I can understand the plight of the settlers as they don't want to leave their homes.
However, I can also understand the Israeli government's desire to stop domestic terrorism, something it has dealt with for decades. Radical Palestinians have attacked the Israelis and radical Jews have likewise attacked the Palestinians.
Sure, I was there a week and I didn't hear a single gunshot or explosion. But that doesn't mean there weren't reminders of terrorism from years past.
While in a shop in Jerusalem, there were a few bolts displayed on a wall. Next to the bolts there was a sign saying they were shrapnel from a bomb that had once destroyed the shop's window. Men and women from the Israeli Army patrolled the streets of Jerusalem and we passed a whole caravan of soldiers while driving through the West Bank.
Imagine walking the streets of Cincinnati and seeing soldiers patrolling with automatic weapons. Chances are you won't. This is a reality the Israeli's live with every day.
Then, there's the barbed wire. If there's a profitable business in Israel, it's barbed wire manufacturing. The stuff is everywhere. It's most pronounced on the security fence that separates Israel proper from the West Bank, an area that has large Palestinian communities.
Most of the terrorism in Jerusalem came from the West Bank, so the security wall was hailed as the solution, at least temporarily, to the terrorist problem. And it has worked, sort of. It does beg the question: Is it good to put a fence through the middle of your country?
It depends on who you ask. My roommate Jake Hancock, of Los Angeles, and I had a conversation about the security fence with a shopkeeper in Jerusalem. He thought it was odd we were asking the question and said that everyone in Jerusalem thinks it's a good idea.
However, a person we talked to who lived in the West Bank was not a fan of the security fence or the Gaza disengagement for that matter.
So, you really can't please everyone.
Just look at the United States. Part of Bush's strategy to stop terrorism was to invade Iraq. That decision split the country, just like the Gaza Disengagement has split Israel.
There are those who work for peace between the two peoples. We stopped in the All for Peace radio station run by Muslims and Jews.
The station works for peaceful solutions between Muslims and Jews. If they can see past their differences toward the bigger goal of peace, maybe the rest of the country can too.
That doesn't mean it's an easy road ahead. There's a long history of violence to overcome.
However, if a group of people, however small, can see past that in the hopes of moving forward, it proves there is indeed hope.
And as Margaret Mead, feminist and anthropologist, said, "Never doubt that a small group of thoughtful, committed citizens can change the world. Indeed, it's the only thing that ever has."
(C) 2005 The News Record via U-WIRE

Load-Date: October 12, 2005


End of Document