VIOLENT STEREOTYPES OF A PEACEFUL PEOPLE
St. Louis Post-Dispatch (Missouri)
December 6, 1994, Tuesday, FIVE STAR Edition


Copyright 1994 St. Louis Post-Dispatch, Inc.
Section: EDITORIAL; Pg. 11B; COMMENTARY COLUMN
Length: 903 words
Byline: Jack G. Shaheen
Body


Television news programs are perpetuating the myth that Muslims possess an ingrained, unprovoked hatred of "civilized" peoples, notably Americans and Israelis.
On Oct. 3, CBS-TV's "Eye On America," featuring journalist Steven Emerson, presented Islam not as a religion but as a political threat. The program asserted that money is being raised by Arabs and Muslims in the United States for a "holy war" here, and in the Middle East.
On Nov. 13, "60 Minutes" displayed Emerson preaching a similar gospel. And on Nov. 27, the public television system (PBS) offered Emerson's "Jihad! In America" on KETC-TV, Channel 9.
Although Emerson says the vast majority of U.S. Arabs and Muslims are not associated with radical activities, he selectively frames Arabs and Muslims as "cultural others." Ugly Muslim portraits stand in stark contrast to his weak disclaimers.
Continuously repeated, these cliches have a formidable and enduring impact. In September, a $ 1 million mosque in Yuba City, Calif., was burned to the ground. In October, vandals attempted to torch a mosque in Brooklyn, N.Y.
Make no mistake, there are individuals - Arabs, Irish, Italians, Jews and others - preaching enmity and financing terror. But they are a small minority. No doubt some of what Emerson says about some Arabs and Muslims spewing hate and advocating violence is true. There are some Muslim extremists in the United States.
But when he states that future attacks by "Muslim radicals" in the United States "seem inevitable," he offers no substantiating evidence. Furthermore, he purports to have "uncovered more than 30 groups that fund radical Islamic activists." Yet, he cites only a few. Such declarations demand specifics: names, numbers of "activists" and where they are based. Absent this information, the documentary lacks credibility while tarring entire communities with one diabolic brush.
"Jihad!" is perilous television, pandering to stereotypes that feed collective hatreds. The program's poisonous images encourage Americans to believe that all Muslims in the United States and their charitable and academic organizations are laundering money for a holy war in the Middle East.
When people are reduced to "cultural others," the unimaginable becomes possible. As a result of "Jihad!," some peace-loving Muslims who love and genuinely respect the United States will likely be victimized by vicious slurs or hate crimes.
What puzzles me is why PBS chose to champion "Jihad!," a program setting "them," the Muslims, apart from "us."
Yesterday's monolithic Muslim portraits fester alongside those of today. Long before this PBS documentary, Islam was misunderstood and maligned.
Englishman John Buchan declared in his popular 1916 novel, "Greenmantle," "Islam is a fighting creed, and the mullah still stands in the pulpit with the Koran in one hand and a drawn sword in the other."
This year's film"True Lies" displays Arnold Schwarzenegger shooting scores of kuffiyeh-clad Arab-Muslim "terrorists," who ignite an A-bomb in the Florida Keys.
Injurious illusions pervade Western media. Consider documentaries labeled "The Islamic Bomb" and "The Sword of Islam"; books tagged "Inflamed Islam" and "The Fire of Islam"; magazine and newspaper essays entitled "The Roots of Muslim Rage" and "Muslim Time Bomb."
Unless journalists commit themselves to combating, not perpetuating, slanderous images, the stereotype will worsen, adversely affecting public opinion, foreign policy and scarring U.S. citizens.
Stereotypes do not exist in a vacuum. History teaches us that hurtful portraits displaying blacks, Native Americans, Asians and Jews as sadistic caricatures have a telling effect.
As to what actions responsible citizens might take to combat prejudicial portraits, I offer this example. Recently, St. Louis' KMOV-TV's 10 p.m. newscast featured "Terrorism and Money," a story unfairly painting resident Muslims as supporters of terrorism. Concerned, J. David Levy, president of the Jewish Community Relations Council, wrote to KMOV's news director: "We abhor the violence of terrorism and those who support it. We also abhor the stereotyping of communities," said Levy. "Unfortunately, your presentation did just that to the Islamic community. We ask, that in the future, sensitivity be shown and there be no blanket condemnation, implicit or explicit, of entire groups."
Almost immediately, the station aired an apology.
In response to programs denigrating Muslims, for three consecutive Tuesdays, beginning Jan. 3, Channel 9's Mosaic, hosted by Linda Connor, will present a series focusing on Islam. The programs, featuring local religious leaders, will debunk malevolent myths and help strengthen the bonds among peoples, be they Christians, Jews, Hindus or Muslims.
PBS would be wise to emulate Channel 9's actions, to offer media portraits of Arabs and Muslims that illuminate, not darken perceptions. There are 6 million to 8 million Muslims in the United States; by the year 2000, Muslims will constitute 27 percent of the world's population. Few realize that the word Islam stems from the Arabic word al-salarn, meaning peace, and that many Muslims are creating bridges of improved understanding between Arabs and Israelis, Arabs and Americans.
The actions of Channel 9 and J. David Levy echo Elie Wiesel's wisdom. "There are good people and bad people in every community," says Wiesel. "No human race is superior; no religious faith is inferior."

Load-Date: December 7, 1994


End of Document