Violence in India concerns professors
The Leader-Telegram (Eau Claire, Wisconsin)
November 29, 2008 Saturday


Copyright 2008 
Distributed by McClatchy-Tribune Business News
Section: STATE AND REGIONAL NEWS
Length: 402 words
Byline: Pamela Powers, Leader-Telegram, Eau Claire, Wis.
Body


Nov. 29--MENOMONIE -- Two area educators from India said Friday that terrorism has occurred for years in India, but not to the extent of the 10 sites attacked Wednesday and Thursday in Mumbai by gunmen who killed about 150 people, including at least five Americans.
"It is sad and kind of frustrating that people are willing to do that," said UW-Eau Claire professor of finance Raj Aroskar, who has been at the university six years and has lived in America 11 years.
His parents live about 20 minutes from where the shootings occurred and are fine.
Terrorism has been an issue back into the 1980s.
"You are very worried if you are going to be coming back if you leave your house," Aroskar said.
Kashmir in northern India has largely been the site of terrorism, but it has spread south, Aroskar said.
This week's attack, which appears to have targeted British and American visitors, will probably impact tourism.
"People will think twice," Aroskar said.
The attacks targeted the heart of India's financial district. A group calling themselves Deccan Mujahideen claimed responsibility for the mayhem. Locations hit included two major hotels, a train station and a hospital. By Friday evening, at least nine gunmen had been killed and one arrested, according to The Associated Press.
UW-Stout assistant professor of English and philosophy Lopa Basu, a native of India, said she believes any impact on tourism will be short term.
"Mumbai is too vital of city," she said.
Basu's family, including her parents and sister, live in India. Her sister lives in the suburbs of Mumbai, and all are well, Basu said.
"It is horrific," she said of the attacks. "Nothing like this has ever happened in India before."
There have been terrorist attacks, but not at this scale with this many people killed and injured.
In Kashmir, foreign tourists have been kidnapped to gain media attention, which has cut tourism travel there, said Basu, who has taught at UW-Stout for four years and lived in the U.S. for 14 years.
To see more of the Leader-Telegram or to subscribe to the newspaper, go to http://www.leadertelegram.com/. Copyright (c) 2008, Leader-Telegram, Eau Claire, Wis. Distributed by McClatchy-Tribune Information Services. For reprints, email tmsreprints@permissionsgroup.com, call 800-374-7985 or 847-635-6550, send a fax to 847-635-6968, or write to The Permissions Group Inc., 1247 Milwaukee Ave., Suite 303, Glenview, IL 60025, USA.

Load-Date: December 2, 2008


End of Document