Violence is the wrong answer to terrorism
St. Petersburg Times (Florida)
August 27, 1998, Thursday, 0 South Pinellas Edition


Copyright 1998 Times Publishing Company
Section: EDITORIAL; LETTERS; Pg. 15A; LETTER
Length: 1931 words
Body


The Times editorial (Necessary blows in the war against terrorism, Aug. 21)  supporting the cruise missile bombing raids on Afghanistan and Sudan was  extremely disappointing. You admit that "in the short run, our military  response is likely to provoke more terrorist activity aimed at American  targets, not less." But then you go on to rationalize your approval of  actions that are senseless and counterproductive, and contribute nothing  toward world peace.
One can only speculate what twisted chain of events led to the bombing of  innocents in Kenya and Tanzania. Certainly, no injustice or oppression,  however heinous and malicious, should inspire such savage disregard for human  life. No grievance, however injurious, should justify the indiscriminate use  of violence that these bombings represent.
It troubles me deeply that human beings are still engaged in this type of  behavior, and we should devote generous resources to understanding and  resolving the root causes of these conflicts, while doing everything possible  to avoid unnecessary bloodshed. Using terrorist violence against civilians  negates whatever legitimacy a cause might have had, but terrorism, whether by  car bomb or cruise missile, is still terrorism.
LETTERS
The U.S. response to the embassy bombings, rationalized as "retaliation,"  will undoubtedly generate the greatest wave of violence against Americans and  U.S. interests ever seen. Who will benefit from this?
Here's a thought: The propagandists and apologists who explain such  barbarity as "fighting terrorism" and "defending our national interests"  are covering for policies hatched by the corporate empire-builders and their  war machine.
Their grandiose plans to dominate the "new world order" through global  military power are dependent on getting us - American workers, citizens,  taxpayers - to approve and to pay the bill. That becomes problematic when the  biggest enemy they can come up with is Saddam Hussein, who lost 1,400 tanks in  the Gulf "war," yet couldn't destroy a single U.S./allied tank. (Fourteen  were destroyed, but all by "friendly fire"!)
The stress must be overwhelming on these guys to figure out a rationale for  increased military spending and a massive global military presence. This "war  on terrorism" should do the trick, at least for now. By bombing Sudan and  Afghanistan, the warmakers have planted the seeds for a whole new crop of  terrorists. But not to worry - they will defend you from them, no matter how  much it costs.
The high-tech bombing raids conducted by the United States against targets  in Afghanistan and Sudan are seen by most in the world community as an  extremely arrogant and destructive action, taken unilaterally by a nation with  little regard for even the most basic principles of international war.
And for those here at home who cheer on this madness, keep in mind that a  government dominated by military and intelligence "national security" geeks  will think nothing of supporting a police state at home if it furthers their  global agenda. 
 
Michael Canney, St. Petersburg 
 
Feeding a deadly cycle 
 
  Re: Bombing Sudan and Afghanistan.
The Irish use car bombs, the United State uses cruise missiles. The results  are the same. The cycle has begun. Northern Ireland apparently hasn't taught  us that terrorism has many faces.
J.J. Garden, Indian Shores 
 
The response to Iraq 
 
   Re: What is the real U.S. policy on Iraq?, by Jack Payton, Aug. 16.
I share diplomatic editor Jack Payton's dissatisfaction with the weak U.S.  response to Iraq's shutting down inspection of its weapons of mass  destruction. In his Aug. 16 column he accuses President Clinton and Secretary  of State Madeleine Albright of deception in allegedly trying to conceal a  change of policy.
Payton should be blaming France, Russia and China, three permanent members  of the U.N. Security Council, and most of the Arab countries for opposing a  tough policy toward Iraq. Does Payton want the United States, backed by only  the United Kingdom, to bomb Iraq? If Payton does advocate that, he should say  so.
The United States needs the cooperation of Russia and China in Bosnia,  Kosovo, North Korea, Pakistan and elsewhere. Economic crises in Asia and  Russia also require the cooperation of Russia and China. The feckless attitude  of France, Russia and China toward Iraq is deplorable, but Payton should not  be blaming the Clinton administration for it. 
 
Sidney A. Ellis, St. Petersburg 
 
Education changes are needed 
 
      After reading section A of the Aug. 20 St. Petersburg Times, I am  concerned for the children who attend Florida public schools. I myself am an  early childhood educator. The elementary years are vital for a child to be  successful. For us to say there's a limit to our funds to improve the quality  of our children's education is bogus. Our future depends on their success.
When I speak of education, I am referring to book smarts as well as  teaching children to be compassionate, respectful of others and themselves  and, most of all, to have a positive self-image. This all begins in the  elementary and preschool years. We need more classrooms, lower  children-to-teacher ratios so that children and teachers can form these  positive relationships. Often in this day and age, with divorce rates so high,  single or teen parent homes, crime and drugs, teachers are the only positive  and stable influence in young children's lives. The role a teacher plays has  changed greatly in the past years. We not only teach, we counsel, love and  believe in each child who enters our classroom.
In my opinion, whether or not Buddy MacKay gets voted into office, changes  need to be made. If it's a question of funding, tax increases or just  political B.S., we, as the state of Florida, need to put education first. I  would be proud to have my tax dollars spent on education rather than road  construction.
If you think we are traveling down a rough road now, just wait until all  these children lacking a proper education are running things. 
 
Jennifer Cataldo, St. Petersburg 
 
A better way to improve education 
 
      Re: Candidates make the effort on education, by Tim Nickens, Aug. 16.
As an educator who has taught in elementary schools where children do well  and in others where children do poorly, I would be inclined to give Jeb Bush  an "F" for his plan to use more standardized tests to grade each school and  then reward good schools and punish poor ones.
One school district in which I taught solved the problem by recognizing  that children who didn't do well in school most often came from homes that  were educationally and economically disadvantaged. They did not do poorly  because they had less intelligence but because their parents had less  education, had little time to read to them, to help with homework and become  involved at their schools. Instead, they were struggling to provide food,  clothing and shelter with little money for books, educational games,  computers, etc., that are usually found in more affluent homes.
The problem was solved not by giving more money to good schools and blaming  teachers at poor schools, but by cutting class size, thereby enabling teachers  to give more individual attention to children with learning problems. Their  strategy worked. The children were soon brought up to grade level. No one  accused school board members of being racist, but they were applauded for  being realists.
Admittedly, cutting class size will cost more, but if Bush can find funds  to reward "A" schools with $ 110 per student and pay for vouchers to move  children from "F" schools to private schools, couldn't that money be spent  to improve those public schools that are in trouble? He might also put the  Legislature on notice that, if elected, he will expect lottery money to be  used as was intended, i.e., to enhance education.
Personally, I do not believe that in most instances a child's failure to  learn is caused by the inadequacy of his teachers or building principal.  However, if that is proved to be true, the cheapest way to solve the problem  might be to reassign personnel from "A" schools to "F" schools. 
 
Mary N. Miller, Clearwater 
 
Disgusting approach to schools 
 
      Re: Books, prayer, safety and class size, Aug. 23.
How can this state use budget windfall tax money for a stupid "tax-free  week" when our kids don't have textbooks? The buying spree that benefited the  retailers saved little for the parents. We must be the laughingstock of the  United States! The Florida legislators continue their fight to keep Florida's  low school rating nationwide. Disgusting!
And class size? Or no teacher? My friend's son came home from the first day  of school last week and announced he had no teacher. Not enough to go around!  Face the fact that families are growing and schools must be built and teachers  hired. If the pool of new teachers is empty, who is to blame for that sorry  state?
As to school prayer: Take your kids and go to church. 
 
Martha J. Lyons, Clearwater 
 
Focus on the early grades 
 
   Sometimes Martin Dyckman just makes me angry. But I do agree with Aug. 25  column Private schools wary of vouchers. Anyone truly interested in education  improvement should concentrate the money on smaller classes from kindergarten  through third grade. No child should have to start school without his/her  parents teaching him/her what a book, words and the alphabet are.   For other  grade levels, small classes should be for slow learners and those hard to  discipline. I have learned (and I have lived through three-fourths of a  century) that children with the right start breeze through their school years.
My start was at Woodlawn in St. Petersburg, which at the time was a new  school with small classes in an unfinished building. I also had a grandfather  who had been taking us (for at least three years) to the public library before  we entered school in the first grade. My siblings and I all graduated from St.  Petersburg High School as members of the National Honor Society.
Too many parents today blame the school and the teachers for the failure of  their children and grab at vouchers to get out of their responsibility. It  seems to me the politicians are trying to do the same thing. In my opinion  that money would be better spent at the public elementary school by the  educators than anyone else. 
 
Barbara Lawyer Startup, Clearwater 
 
Join in the Scrabble fun 
 
      Re: In a word, Scrabble, Aug. 12.
Thank you for running such a lengthy story about Scrabble. My only quibble  is that it didn't mention where to play locally (the article originated in  California).
There are weekly games in St. Petersburg (Roberts Adult Center), Palm  Harbor (Palm Harbor Senior Center) and also in Tampa. Many of the players  participate in NSA tournaments (the next local tournament will be in Fort  Myers at the end of September).
We would gladly welcome new players. Come one, come all - we'll supply the  two- and three-letter word list! Come by car, come by umiaq (or umiak, or  oomiac, or oomiak, or oomiack).
I can't wait to show this article to those friends who say we don't play  with "real" words (like aa, ae, ai, oe, azo, zoa, fiz, jeu, etc.)! 
 
Kate Petroczy, St. Petersburg 
 
Share your opinions 
 
   Letters for publication should be addressed to Letters to the Editor, P.O.  Box 1121, St. Petersburg, FL 33731. They can be sent by e-mail to  letterssptimes.com or by fax to 893-8675.
They should be brief and must include the writer's name, address and phone  number. Please include a handwritten signature when possible. 

Graphic

 
BLACK AND WHITE CARTOON, Don Addis; In a frame labeled "Breath of Life" an underwater news cameraman in a tie and business shirt breathes from a tank labeled SCANDAL.

Load-Date: August 27, 1998


End of Document