Virginia Wright?
Richmond Times Dispatch (Virginia)
November 28, 2009 Saturday
Final Edition


Copyright 2009 Richmond Newspapers, Inc. All Rights Reserved
Section: EDITORIAL; Pg. A-14
Length: 364 words
Body


 Wednesday's Op/Ed page carried an open letter to Bob McDonnell from numerous faith leaders urging the governor-elect to distance himself from some recent remarks by the Rev. Pat Robertson, with whom McDonnell has had a long relationship.
 After the massacre at Fort Hood, Robertson said Islam is "not a religion" but a "violent political system." The clergy pointed out, quite rightly, that the vast majority of Muslims are peace-loving people who do not condone violence, let alone terrorism.
 This is not to deny the influence of Islamic radicalism on the Fort Hood shooter, or to ignore the role that Islamic extremism has played in terrorism around the globe. But to suggest that all Muslims rejoice in such acts makes no more sense than to suggest that all Christians endorse the behavior of Jimmy Swaggart, the Bakkers, Ted Haggard, or other fallen Christian idols.
 If Robertson's ill-tempered remarks about Islam were an isolated incident they might be written off. But they are not.
 After residents of Dover, Pa., voted out school-board members who favored teaching intelligent design, Robertson warned them that God would not answer their prayers: "If they have future problems in Dover, I recommend they call on Charles Darwin."
 Robertson stuck up for Charles Taylor, terming a "Christian" the murderous kleptocrat responsible for one of Africa's most horrific civil wars - perhaps because of a business Robertson launched to mine for gold in Taylor's Liberia.
 Robertson predicted that Orlando, Fla., would suffer natural disasters because it put up gay-pride flags. (Two months later, Hurricane Bonnie bypassed Florida but smacked into Virginia Beach, Robertson's home base.)
 And, in perhaps his most famous outrage, Robertson said "I totally concur" when the late Jerry Falwell laid blame for 9/11 at the feet of "the abortionists, and the feminists, and the gays and the lesbians...the ACLU, [and] People For the American Way."
 During the 2008 election, Barack Obama's ties to the Rev. Jeremiah Wright became a subject of fierce debate. Under much pressure, Obama eventually distanced himself from the ravings of his former pastor. Perhaps it's time McDonnell did the same.

Load-Date: February 27, 2010


End of Document