VISITING AMERICAN JEWS CRITICIZE FRENCH FOR SUPPORT OF THE P.L.O.
The New York Times
October 10, 1980, Friday, Late City Final Edition


Copyright 1980 The New York Times Company
Section: Section A; Page 12, Column 3; Foreign Desk
Length: 646 words
Byline: By PAUL LEWIS, Special to the New York Times
Dateline: PARIS, Oct. 9
Body


Two leaders of American Jewish organizations stepped into the political storm created by the recent outbreak of anti-Semitic violence in France today, urging French Jews to greater activism and criticizing the French Government's support for the Palestine Liberation Organization.
Rabbi Alexander M. Schindler, president of the Union of Hebrew Congregations, arrived from New York to represent the Conference of Presidents of Major Jewish Organizations at tomorrow night's services at the Reform synagogue on the Rue Copernic where a bomb killed four people and seriously injured 10 last week.
Rabbi Schindler, who will speak at the service, said in an interview today that he will urge French Jews, who are deeply divided over how to respond to recent provocations, to be ''more active and more vocal'' in standing up for their interests than they have been in the past.
Two American Jewish Organization leaders criticize French Government's support of Palestine Liberation Organization and urge French Jews to greater activism, during visit to Paris (France)
He also criticized the French Government for failing to condemn terrorism by the Palestine Liberation Organization, implying that France's strongly pro-Arab policy in the Middle East may be encouraging anti-Semitism at home. ''If you encourage terrorism in one place, you must expect to find it in others,'' he said, adding that ''when governments criticize Israel, they cheapen the lives of Jews everywhere.''
 
'Need for Enhanced Activity'
Maxwell Greenberg, chairman of the Anti-Defamation League, who has also come here as a result of the bomb explosion, made substantially the same points, although in more cautious language. He said he saw ''a need for enhanced activism'' by French Jews, while stressing that they must also see themselves as French citizens.
He also accused the French Government of condoning Arab terrorism because it is has '' political'' roots. ''You can't wink at the P.L.O. and deplore other incidents of terror,'' he said.
Both Rabbi Schindler and Mr. Greenberg clearly struck a sensitive note with their calls to French Jews to be more militant and their criticism of the French Government's Middle East policies. After years of near political invisibility, France's 700,000 Jews have been growing increasingly active in recent years, largely at the urging of immigrants from France's former North African colonies. Recent anti-Jewish outbreaks have strengthened the trend, as Mr. Greenberg acknowledged today.
But the furor caused by the Copernic bomb attack is becoming increasingly politicized as opposition leaders try to use it to embarrass the Government before the presidential elections in April. During yesterday's parliamentary debate on the bombing, the Socialist leader, @Francois Mitterrand, accused the Government of pursuing left-wing fanatics more vigilantly than right-wing ones, reciting a long list of violent crimes attributed to neo-Nazi groups. 
 
----
 
Jews Stage New York Sit-In
 
Special to the New York Times
Thirteen members of the Jewish Defense League staged a sit-in at the offices of the French cultural and information services in New York yesterday to protest the bombing at a Paris synagogue and called on French Jews to emigrate to Israel.
The demonstrators left the offices at 972 Fifth Avenue peacefully after nearly three hours. There were no arrests.  ''French Jews have no future in France, their future is in Israel,'' said Dov Becker, a spokesman for the group. He said those Jews who would not leave France should arm themselves. He said his group was also protesting ''the inability of the French Government to stop terrorism.''
The demonstrators occupied a room that was open to the public for a photographic exhibition. Andre Baeyens, the service's director of press information, said the protestors did no physical damage and were ''absolutely peaceful.''


End of Document