Visiting Egypt, Gonzales defends prisoner transfers
St. Louis Post-Dispatch (Missouri)
July 2, 2006 Sunday
FOURTH EDITION


Copyright 2006 St. Louis Post-Dispatch, Inc.
Section: NEWS; Pg. A5
Length: 336 words
Byline: By Nadia Abou El-Magd THE ASSOCIATED PRESS
Dateline: CAIRO, EGYPT 
Body


In his first visit to Egypt, the U.S. attorney general on Saturday defended the transfer of terrorism suspects for incarceration and interrogation in other countries.
Human rights groups have raised concerns about the so-called extraordinary rendition of terrorism suspects, some of whom have charged that they were tortured in the countries where they were sent. The U.S. has said it does not send anyone to countries that torture. 
Attorney General Alberto Gonzales acknowledged the U.S. practice of sending terrorism suspects to prisons in their home countries. But he refused to confirm reports that Egypt, whose human rights record has been criticized by Washington, had received any of the suspects.
"I'm not going to confirm that there have been any (suspects sent to Egypt), and I'm certainly not going to talk about the numbers -- it's intelligence activity and we just don't do that," Gonzales said after meeting with Egyptian President Hosni Mubarak.
"All I can say is that we do have an obligation to seek assurances from any country in which we are returning someone, that the individual is not going to be tortured," he said.
Egyptian Interior Minister Habib el-Adly has denied that Egypt was torturing terrorism suspects from abroad.
Detainees have said they were transferred from the U.S. to secret facilities in countries including Poland, Romania, Jordan, Syria and Egypt.
Italy is investigating allegations that 22 CIA agents kidnapped an Egyptian Muslim preacher, Osama Moustafa Hassan Nasr, from a Milan street in February 2003 and returned him to Egypt.
Gonzales said he saw no contradiction between the U.S. promoting democracy around the world and running the detention center at Guantanamo Bay, Cuba, where activists and former detainees have alleged abuse has taken place.
The Supreme Court ruled Thursday that U.S. plans to put some Guantanamo detainees on trial before military commissions was unconstitutional because the commissions were not authorized by Congress and violated international law.

Notes

 Nation 

Load-Date: July 8, 2006


End of Document