VIVE L'INTELLIGENCE;
 THE FRENCH ARE SOLIDLY HELPING IN THE WAR ON TERRORISM
Pittsburgh Post-Gazette (Pennsylvania)
May 18, 2003 Sunday
TWO STAR EDITION


Copyright 2003 P.G. Publishing Co.
Section: EDITORIAL,
Length: 510 words
Dateline: PARIS
Body


The bomb blasts in Riyadh bring the campaign against al-Qaida and international terrorism jarringly back into focus. Unlike the attack on Saddam Hussein's regime in Iraq, this is a long-term battle where the United States needs all the help it can get.
 From the beginning, French law enforcement and intelligence agencies have been part of that campaign. But some American officials seem much more focused on vengeance, punishing the French for their "disloyalty" over Iraq, than working with them to counter the more immediate threat of terrorism.
Despite the heated anti-French rhetoric emanating from Washington, the anti-terrorist collaboration between France and America has continued unabated. As one official in the French government closely connected with the intelligence community puts it, "On the practical working level, nothing has changed. We've managed to separate that aspect of our relations from the diplomatic problems of the Iraqi crisis."
 Since the Sept. 11 attacks, the French have been providing key assistance in Afghanistan. And in some ways the French quietly aided the attack on Saddam.
 France did not close its airspace to U.S. military aircraft. And while French diplomats were doing their best to block American intervention, the French military was providing information for the buildup of U.S. military and intelligence forces in the former French colony of Djibouti.
 "Each time they asked us for input we replied," the French government source says. The French understand that the Americans are upset. "So far, it's been more a question of pinpricks," says the government source, "but too many pinpricks taken together, you could worry."
 "Pinpricks" like canceled appointments, brutally candid remarks from President Bush and other top officials, delays in responding to queries or symbolic acts, as when Attorney General John Ashcroft attended an international conference on terrorism in France recently, but didn't show up for the final press conference.
 The cold shoulder America has shown toward the June air show at Le Bourget is much less subtle. According to the magazine Aviation Week, "U.S. military aircraft won't be the only notable absence at this year's Paris air show; participation by the U.S. aerospace industry also will be dramatically smaller than in the past."
 One reason U.S. companies have cut back is that the U.S. government has been sending signals to industry leaders. As the chief executive of Lockheed Martin, Vance Coffman, told Aviation Week, "The basic thought is, 'Don't wreck any relations -- just send a message.' "
 "They need to understand that their behavior was totally unacceptable," said a top executive from another company.
 The French government source says, "The question is how long the anti-French campaign will go on -- six months or six years? And how deep will it cut? I like to be optimistic; others are not."
 There's no question that Francophobes in the Bush administration could poison relations at all levels, including the fight against terrorism.
 That would be a serious mistake.

Notes

Barry Lando is a former producer for CBS News' "60 Minutes." He wrote this for the International Herald Tribune. Jack Kelly is on assignment in Iraq.

Load-Date: May 22, 2003


End of Document