VOTE LIKELY NEXT WEEK ON ANTI-TERRORISM BILL
Richmond Times Dispatch (Virginia)
October 19, 2001 Friday City Edition


Copyright 2001 Richmond Newspapers, Inc.
Section: GENERAL; Pg. A-11
Length: 318 words
Byline: The Associated Press
Dateline: WASHINGTON
Body


House negotiators have agreed to a Senate demand to include money-laundering legislation in President Bush's anti-terrorism package, clearing the last major hurdle to passage, senators said yesterday. thu>
The Senate and House probably will take up the compromise early next week after aides draft the final version over the weekend, said Sen. Patrick J. Leahy, D-Vt. and chairman of the Senate Judiciary Committee.
Negotiators agreed Wednesday to end after four years the new wiretapping, electronic surveillance and secret-search portion of the legislation, the most contested part of the package.
With the agreement to include money laundering, the most difficult negotiations were over.
"We've just got to work out the details over the weekend," Leahy said.
Work that normally could take a day now requires more time because of the shutdown of the House and Senate office buildings for anthrax testing, he said.
House and Senate members have not decided on the final version of the money-laundering plan. The House Financial Services Committee chairman, GOP Rep. Michael G. Oxley of Ohio, and Maryland Democratic Sen. Paul S. Sarbanes, the Senate Banking Committee chairman, have been working on a compromise on the language.
Both the House and Senate versions are intended to fight money laundering around the world, thwart the financing of terrorism and protect U.S. banks from illicit money.
The House and Senate anti-terrorism measures would expand the FBI's wiretapping authority and impose stronger penalties for those who harbor or finance terrorists. The plans also would increase punishment of terrorists.
House leaders insisted on changing the Senate package so the most intrusive of the new measures would expire after a certain period.
Senate leaders insisted on including the money-laundering legislation because they feared the House would not pass such legislation that would be acceptable to senators.

Load-Date: October 23, 2001


End of Document