Walking away from Iraq isn't a viable option
USA TODAY
February 15, 2007 Thursday
FINAL EDITION


Copyright 2007 Gannett Company, Inc. All Rights Reserved
Section: NEWS; Pg. 10A
Length: 405 words
Body


Every campaign sound bite that demands timetables and withdrawals from Iraq or Afghanistan strengthens and emboldens our terrorist enemies.
If we walk away, we will face stronger terror recruiting and weakened Muslim governments that will ignore our cries to root out the breeding grounds for terror in their own lands for decades to come.
If we leave before Iraq can stand on its own, we will throw the oil markets into chaos, and we'll encourage terrorists to try to create Muslim states all over the region. We will then be faced with terrorism actively expanding toward the West.
We are at a historic crossroads; to some, we have chosen a path that is unacceptable. Unfortunately, walking away is not an option, and we need to fully support this war at all costs.
Millions may die based on the choices we make, and countries may fall, as happened when our parents and grandparents balked after the Tet Offensive in Vietnam.
Ed Johnson
Troy, Mich.
Admit mistake, pull out
It's sad that President Bush can't even get strong support from his own party on a major issue such as the war in Iraq ("Troop increase is a tough sale for GOP senators on '08 ballot," News, Feb. 2).
When things like this happen in politics, you should realize you are on the wrong track.
Unfortunately, our president is still pulling for this troop increase, and it pains me to watch our country go on this downward spiral. It's about time we realized Iraq was a mistake and pull out before we cause more problems that our children will have to fix.
Aleahue Abu
Bradenton, Fla.
Consider the consequences
If we cut and run from the enemy in Iraq, do those who call for an end to the war think the terrorists in and around Iraq's borders will not make their way to the United States?
Retreating in the face of terrorism will only embolden the terrorists.
England, France, Israel, Russia and Spain have all experienced terrorism after retreating or making concessions to terrorists.
Radical Islam has learned that the hated infidel will bow and submit in the face of terrorism if that terrorism is vicious enough.
To all those who would get us out of Iraq now, I ask, "Where do you want to fight the terrorists? In the shopping malls of America? On U.S. buses and trains? In our elementary schools?"
The war in Iraq is not something we can afford to lose. America must win -- at whatever cost -- or the consequences will be too horrible to describe.
David McCourt
Roseau, Minn. 

Load-Date: February 15, 2007


End of Document