Wanna Buy Plutonium?
Christian Science Monitor (Boston, MA)
August 18, 1994, Thursday


Copyright 1994 The Christian Science Publishing Society
Section: EDITORIAL; Pg. 18
Length: 406 words
Body


TWO years ago, when plutonium traces were found in a car
abandoned on the Munich autobahn, the implications of such nuclear
smuggling made it one of the main threats to peace and security. In
the flush of the post-cold-war period and the hopes for warm
working relations with Moscow, this fact was not given top priority
by either the Bush or Clinton administrations.
However, detective work by German authorities that resulted in
four arrests of those selling illegal weapons-grade plutonium this
summer should keep the problem on the front burner. In the past
week, two seizures of fissionable material originating in the
former Soviet Union have been made. Despite admiration for German
security, the real question is: How much material is getting
through?
Last Wednesday German police stopped a private Spanish-Colombian
operation that would have delivered 8.8 pounds of plutonium 239,
the isotope used in nuclear weapons. It takes 17 pounds of such
plutonium to make a standard-size bomb; but smaller amounts can
wreak havoc on civil society if used as a terrorist weapon. A
German businessman arrested in May admits to having Iraqi contacts.
One lesson of the Gulf war is that states desiring to stand up to
the US will seek some nuclear cabability.
Two years ago experts pooh-poohed the idea of ex-Soviet nuclear
stockpiles being raided or plundered. Yet waning discipline in the
ex-Soviet Army, its need for cash, and, most important, the
astounding rise of mafia control in Moscow and chaos in former
Soviet states makes this a live threat. The Clinton administration
conducted a nuclear proliferation policy review for the United
Nations last September, concluding that nuclear terrorism was the
No. 1 danger. Still, it is not clear the White House is adequately
seized by the issue.
In post-Soviet Moscow, three large mafia organizations are
running the city. Whether they have an interest in moving the
society to a civil order is unknown. A state takes responsibility
for collective security and safety; with a mafia, anything is
possible. On Tuesday Russia denied that its weapons stockpiles had
been breached. Given the breaches in Russian discipline, however,
how can either the West or the Kremlin know for sure?
Some US scientists think the plutonium from Munich was slightly
below weapons grade. This is no reason to put off the problem.
Handling nuclear terrorism will require a different security
approach from that of the cold war. Much more focus is needed.

Load-Date: August 22, 1994


End of Document