WAR ON TERRORISM: Rumsfeld: Defense secretary or media star?
 The Atlanta Journal-Constitution
January 9, 2002 Wednesday
Home Edition


Copyright 2002 The Atlanta Journal-Constitution


Section: News;
Length: 614 words
Byline: GEORGE EDMONSON
Body


Washington --- Do you suppose anyone ever asked James Forrestal what sort of shoes he was wearing? Or quizzed Robert McNamara about a bandage on his thumb?
But those questions don't seem out of line for Donald Rumsfeld, undoubtedly the first U.S. secretary of defense to be sketched on a magazine cover in the classic Betty Grable over-the-shoulder pinup pose.
For the record, Rumsfeld acknowledged Tuesday in a live interview on C-SPAN that he was, indeed, wearing his "Taos, N.M., hiking shoes." He did note, as the camera began pulling back, that he had asked they not be shown because, "I'll get in trouble." The camera dutifully moved back in to focus on his head and shoulders before the picture had reached his ankles.
AJC
The 30-minute program was yet another example of the popularity and familiarity that Rumsfeld has developed through his frequent live war briefings at the Pentagon.
The program received more than 200 e-mail questions after announcing Monday on its Web site that Rumsfeld would appear. Host Connie Brod mixed those in with live telephone calls, both of which C-SPAN said were higher than normal.
Subjects ranged from abortion to terrorism, from the highly specific to the broadly general.
For example, a caller from Illinois thanked Rumsfeld for his service: "I'm a Democrat, but I fully support --- I call it your administration."
Brod read from two e-mails that addressed how Rumsfeld deals with reporters in the Pentagon briefings. Neither was complimentary toward the media.
"When I leave the house in the morning, my wife, Joyce, says, 'Now, Don, they have their job, and you have yours.' And it's true," Rumsfeld said. "The truth is that the tougher the question, the more likely it's a question the people in the listening audience want to hear the answer to."
He laughed as Brod read an e-mail from Roanoke, Va., asking how he was handling the fact that he has a "virtual fan club" and whether the high number of viewers for briefings resulted from interest in military strategy or his charisma.
"It's the fact that the subject matter is so important to our country," he replied.
Among the serious topics addressed Tuesday by Rumsfeld was civilian casualties in Afghanistan. "There probably has never in the history of the world been a conflict that has been done as carefully and with such measure and care and with such minimal collateral damage to buildings and infrastructure and with such small numbers of unintended civilian casualties," he said.
On the program, Rumsfeld also took an opportunity to recommend a book that he has cited often to members of Congress and others: Roberta Wohlstetter's 1962 "Pearl Harbor: Warning and Decisions."
Twenty men have served as secretary of defense; Forrestal was sworn in as the first in 1947. Rumsfeld first served in the position under President Ford and, at 43, was then the youngest when he took office in 1975.
This time, he came into the secretary's job talking a great deal about transforming the military. With the war against terrorism, his visibility has increased greatly, as have examinations of his style and approach. National Review this month featured the cover drawing of him with the headline "The Stud: Don Rumsfeld, America's New Pin-up."
Tuesday's program closed with another magazine cover. Brod showed the February Vanity Fair, which features an Annie Leibovitz photograph of President Bush and Cabinet members.
Brod asked about the bandage on Rumsfeld's thumb, and he told her that he had cut it in New Mexico, where he has a ranch near Taos.
Unfolding the cover, Brod said, "Unfortunately, you made the under part of the fold."
"That's not unfortunate," Rumsfeld said. "That's just fine with me."

Graphic

 
Photo: Defense Secretary Donald Rumsfeld's frequent, charisma-loaded televised Pentagon briefings have brought him great popularity and a "virtual fan club."/ JOE MARQUETTE / Associated Press

Load-Date: September 28, 2002


End of Document