WAR ON TERRORISM: CRISIS AT A GLANCE;
Latest developments at home and abroad
The Atlanta Journal-Constitution
December 25, 2001 Tuesday,
Home Edition


Copyright 2001 The Atlanta Constitution
Section: News;; Brief
Length: 558 words
Body


SHARING THE POWER: Afghanistan's new leader, Hamid Karzai, named prominent warlord Rashid Dostum to be deputy defense minister Monday in an effort to unite the country's often-feuding factions. Dostum had been one of the new Afghan government's early critics. An ethnic Uzbek who controls the largest northern city, Mazar-e-Sharif, he had been angry because the key ministries of defense, foreign affairs and the interior all went to an ethnic Tajik group. AIR SECURITY TIGHTENED: Airports around Europe tightened security, some requiring passengers to send their shoes through X-ray machines, after a passenger allegedly tried to ignite explosives hidden in his sneakers on a flight from Paris to Miami. The French government was reviewing security at its airports, particularly at Charles de Gaulle international airport outside Paris, where the American Airlines flight originated Saturday. In the United States, the Federal Aviation Administration ordered airlines and airports on Sunday to take steps to prevent passengers boarding planes with explosives hidden in shoes. BAIL HEARING SET: The man accused of trying to ignite explosives hidden in his shoes during a trans-Atlantic flight made a brief appearance in a Boston court. A judge ordered him to remain in federal custody and set a bail hearing for Friday. He has requested a court-appointed attorney. A government official said investigators have found no evidence linking the suspect, listed in court papers as Richard Reid, to Osama bin Laden's al-Qaida terror network. TRADING FIRE: Afghan tribal forces traded fire with armed al-Qaida fighters convalescing in a hospital in the Afghan city of Kandahar in a bid to subdue the Arab gunmen, who have been holding out in their ward for weeks.
AJCThe fighters, who are believed to be linked to Osama bin Laden, had said they would kill themselves if anyone tried to take them from Mirwais Hospital, where they were held in a second-floor jail section once used by the Taliban for political prisoners. Hospital officials said the men were armed with grenades and pistols and had threatened to blow themselves up if anyone other than the medical staff approached them. IRAQ LINK QUESTIONED: As the debate intensifies over a possible U.S. anti-terrorism strike against Saddam Hussein, the only reported link between Iraq and the Sept. 11 attacks is increasingly coming under question. The Czech government in October said that Mohamed Atta, a suspected ringleader in the Sept. 11 terrorist attacks, had met in the spring with a senior Iraqi intelligence agent. But in recent weeks, scant new details have emerged about the meeting, and Czech officials have made conflicting statements about the likelihood that it even occurred. Whether the meeting occurred is potentially important because the Bush administration has been debating the merits of shifting its war on terrorism to Iraq. ASSETS FROZEN: Pakistan ordered a freeze in the assets of two militant groups, one of which was blamed for an attack on India's parliament, after the United States urged Islamabad to move against the groups. A spokesman for the State Bank of Pakistan said Pakistani banks and financial institutions had been ordered to freeze the finds of Lashkar-e-Tayyaba and Ummah Tameer-e-Nau, both of which the Bush administration declared terrorist groups last week.

Load-Date: December 25, 2001


End of Document