WAR ON TERRORISM JUST GETTING STARTED;
   MODERATES HOLD KEY TO PEACE IN THE MIDDLE EAST.
Wisconsin State Journal (Madison, WI)
March 19, 2002 Tuesday, ALL Editions


Copyright 2002 Madison Newspapers, Inc.
Section: OPINION; Pg. A8; Editorial
Length: 468 words
Body


The deadly attack on a Christian church in Islamabad is the latest reminder that America's war against terrorism will be fought on many unexpected and sometimes tragic fronts. Attackers who may believe they're guided by God scattered grenades in a crowded church Sunday, killing five people and wounding 45 more. The United States may be winning the ground war in Afghanistan, but there's no shortage of fanatics behind the front lines.
The attack on the Protestant International Church, which has strong ties to Madison, was first intended as a warning to all Americans abroad: "You're not safe, even in a sanctuary such as a church." That's hyperbole, of course, because the vast majority of Americans abroad aren't living in countries with large pockets of Muslim extremists. But some are, and the precautions they take are part of a daily routine.
The attack was also a signal to Pakistan's President Pervez Musharraf, who is cracking down on fundamentalists within his nation's borders. The kidnap-slaying of a Wall Street Journal reporter was part of the backlash; so was Sunday's attack on a church known to the frequented by Americans and other foreigners.
To Musharraf's credit, he is not backing down. He realizes that nothing less than the security of his own country is at stake if militants gain the upper hand. Pakistan has long been a safe harbor for movements such as the Taliban and al-Qaida, which make use of a sophisticated network of guest houses, training bases and terror schools. Musharraf must stand fast and relentlessly close them down. Americans cannot do it; it must come from within Pakistan, a nation that still has far more peace-loving moderates than extremists.
Like the intensely violent conflict between Israel and the Palestinians, the war against terrorism may get worse before it gets better. Terrorist organizations such as al-Qaida have worldwide reach, with or without Osama bin Laden. And, for the moment, they are appealing to a Muslim minority that believes it is engaged in a righteous war of civilizations.
In the long run, it probably won't be America's military might that wins the war on terrorism. It will be won by Pakistanis who don't want their land to be a staging ground for assassins. It will be won by Palestinians who oppose the suicidal extremists in their midst - and by Israelis who ask whether true security can be gained by keeping all the land they seized in their 1967 war with the Arabs. And it will be won by Arab journalists of integrity, such as those in Saudi Arabia who recently broke with tradition to criticize that nation's religious police.
Middle East moderates have it within their power to stamp out terrorism. The United States and its allies must look for chances to deal with those moderates, or risk forever dealing with the extremists.

Load-Date: March 20, 2002


End of Document