WAR ON TERRORISM: Georgia on track with Bush's plans
 The Atlanta Journal-Constitution
July 17, 2002 Wednesday
Home Edition


Copyright 2002 The Atlanta Journal-Constitution


Section: News;
Length: 718 words
Byline: DON PLUMMER
Body


Georgia homeland security officials say they already have addressed most areas identified Tuesday by President Bush as state responsibilities.
"We've already put several measures in place addressing most of those things," said Mickey Lloyd, deputy director of Georgia Homeland Security.
Lloyd was among those briefed Monday night by federal Homeland Security Coordinator Tom Ridge during a nationwide conference with state homeland officials.
A 90-page "National Strategy for Homeland Security" unveiled by Bush identifies six areas to be addressed by the states. They are:
AJC* Creating tighter minimum standards for driver's licenses.
 
* Ensuring the availability of terrorism insurance.
 
* Training to prevent cyber attacks.
 
* Tightening control of financial institutions to reduce money laundering.
 
* Updating procedures for ordering quarantines in cases of bio-terrorism.
  
* Planning for continuity of court operations after an attack.
The only surprise for Georgia officials in Bush's plan, Lloyd said, was the call to develop a plan for court operations.
"That's something we're going to have to take a hard look at," Lloyd said. "But if that's what the marching orders are, we'll get started on it right away."
Such a plan for court operations should be ready by the end of the year, a court official said. The plan, updated and expanded from one developed for the 1996 Summer Olympics, will be shared with each of the state's 159 county court systems, said Billie Bolton of the state's Administrative Office of the Courts.
On driver's licenses, Georgia is one of just a few states to include the applicant's digitally encoded fingerprint. A change under consideration here is to require proof of identity from all license applicants.
In January, state Insurance Commissioner John Oxendine denied a request by companies to exclude terrorism coverage from homeowners' policies.
State officials have joined the FBI's InfraGard program, a consortium of private sector and government organizations that share information about and seek to prevent cyber attacks. The Atlanta InfraGard chapter, which counts more than 200 members, is one of the nation's most active, chapter president Phyllis Schneck said.
A state banking official said the state might add laws regulating money transfer businesses to reduce money laundering.
"Georgia already regulates check cashers and sellers of money orders and travelers checks," said David Sorrell, acting commissioner of the Georgia Department of Banking and Finance. "State laws do not now cover wire transfer companies and currency exchanges, but that is one of the things we are looking at."
On quarantine, a new law calls for public-health officials to develop such plans in case of a bio-terrorism attacks, said Stacey Hoffman, director of risk communications at the Division of Public Health in the state Department of Human Resources.
The law also designates the Division of Public Health as the lead agency when the governor declares a national public health emergency, Hoffman said.
A spokeswoman for Gov. Roy Barnes said he and other state officials will review the president's recommendations.
"The state's Homeland Security Task Force has been reviewing the situation since last year to assess Georgia's preparedness level and assess where Georgia may need to shore up in regards to homeland security," spokeswoman Joselyn Baker said.
Since Sept. 11, Georgia has spent $6.3 million on added security, plus several million more in federal grants, Baker said.
In a survey of state homeland security programs conducted this year by the National Governors Association, Georgia was found to be in relatively good shape, partly because of its experience in preparing for the 1996 Summer Olympics in Atlanta.
State legislators have introduced more than 1,200 anti-terrorism bills since Sept. 11. In Georgia, Barnes set up the inter-agency task force to coordinate actions between state and local agencies and with federal agencies.
The task force includes public safety, emergency management, public health, environmental protection, transportation and defense agencies, along with representatives of local law-enforcement officials and fire chiefs.
The centerpiece of its efforts is a new anti-terrorist intelligence center, which shares space with the FBI counter-terrorism task force.

Load-Date: July 17, 2002


End of Document