WAR ON TERRORISM: Not dealing with attacks earlier hurt, Haig says
 The Atlanta Journal-Constitution
February 20, 2002 Wednesday,
Home Edition


Copyright 2002 The Atlanta Journal-Constitution


Section: News;
Length: 427 words
Byline: RON MARTZ
Body


America's failure to take a hard line against terrorism over the last 30 years helped produce a climate among extremists that cultimated in the Sept. 11 attacks, former Secretary of State Al Haig said Tuesday.
Speaking to the Kiwanis Club of Atlanta, Haig, who served in various posts under three Republican presidents, took past administrations to task for what he described as a lack of character in dealing with terrorist attacks on United States citizens.
The retired four-star Army general cited the Iranian hostage crisis of 1979-80, the bombing of the U.S. Embassy and Marine barracks in Beirut, Lebanon, in 1983, the failure to get rid of Iraqi leader Saddam Hussein during the Gulf War in 1991 and the retreat from Somalia in 1993 as messages to Muslim extremists that the United States would not retaliate.
AJC
"You get in trouble by degrees. That is where character counts," Haig said.
After militant Iranian students stormed the U.S. Embassy in Iran in 1979, taking 52 Americans hostage, officials in President Jimmy Carter's administration spent 14 months negotiating to get them out. A military effort to rescue them well into the crisis ended in disaster.
"What a message we sent to the Islamic world about America's character, or lack thereof," Haig said.
When terrorists blew up the U.S. Embassy and a Marine barracks in Beirut in 1983, killing more than 300 Americans, the United States still took no strong action, Haig said.
After 18 American soldiers were killed in Somalia in 1993, "we put our tail between our legs and crawled out," Haig said.
But Haig, who also served as chief of staff under Richard Nixon during the Watergate scandal, saved some of his harshest criticism for former President George Bush.
He said the elder Bush bowed to the wishes of the coalition fighting to liberate Kuwait and refused to carry the war to Baghdad and oust Hussein. As a result, Iraq now makes up one-third of President Bush's "axis of evil" along with Iran and North Korea.
"In the 10th round, the leader of our country took a dive. He let Saddam Hussein off the hook. That is one of the most serious flaws in American foreign policy since World War II," Haig said.
Haig gave the current president high marks for his approach to the war on terrorism, though.
"I think President Bush for the first time has begun to understand the nature of this beast" that is international terrorism, Haig said.
That means if there is no coalition for future targets in the war on terrorism, the United States must go it alone, much as it did early in the war in Afghanistan, he said.

Graphic

 
Photo:
Former Secretary of State Al Haig says U.S. actions in places such as Lebanon, Iraq and Somalia sent the wrong message.

Load-Date: February 20, 2002


End of Document