WAR ON TERRORISM: CRISIS DEVELOPMENTS
 The Atlanta Journal-Constitution
July 20, 2002 Saturday
Home Edition


Copyright 2002 The Atlanta Journal-Constitution


Section: News;; Brief
Length: 531 words
Body


Extension on airport bag checks
Sen. John Ensign (R-Nevada) introduced legislation that would extend the deadline for checking all bags for explosives at the nation's largest airports, thereby giving Hartsfield International Airport and others like it more time to negotiate a reasonable deadline with the government.
The bill is identical to one introduced last week by Rep. Kay Granger (R-Texas). "We knew we couldn't meet the deadline," Ensign said. "At certain airports this can't be done without putting passengers at greater risk. Not only would there not be greater security, but passengers clogged at ticket counters could be a target for terrorists," Ensign said.
AJC reports and news services
$12 million in checks found on suspect
U.S. customs agents have arrested a Jordanian-born man who allegedly was carrying $12 million in false cashier's checks, alarming counterterrorism officials, who said the suspect may have been trained in al-Qaida terrorist camps in Afghanistan. U.S. officials said the name of Omar Shishani, 47, who was detained Wednesday, appears on a watch list of people trained in Afghanistan by al-Qaida.
Anthrax field tests give false results
The White House is warning that anthrax field tests --- widely used since last fall's attacks --- give fast but often incorrect results, prompting authorities to shut down buildings prematurely and hand out unneeded antibiotics. In a memo being sent Monday to more than 250 federal agencies and to firefighters, police and local officials, authorities advise federal agencies to stop buying commercially available field tests and to cancel any contracts that are pending.
Officers can enforce immigration laws
A group of law enforcement officers in Florida will be given the authority to enforce immigration laws in cases involving terrorism and national security, Justice Department officials announced Friday. Most local law enforcement officers do not have the authority to detain or arrest a person solely on immigration charges.
Afghan bodyguards to protect officials
International peacekeepers agreed Friday to train Afghan bodyguards to protect Cabinet ministers and other senior officials after the slaying of two government members in Kabul in the last six months. Meanwhile, the U.N. special representative for Afghanistan urged the U.N. Security Council to expand the peacekeeping force beyond Kabul to provide security in areas controlled by warlords.
Suspects blamed for pre-9/11 video
Spain's top anti-terrorism judge ordered four Syrian-born al-Qaida suspects held in pretrial custody Friday, including one who filmed videos that may have served as reconnaissance footage for the Sept. 11 hijackers. The judge ruled that the videotapes found last April in the Madrid home of Ghasoub Al-Abrash Ghalyoun indicated foreknowledge of the terrorist attacks.
Paris embassy blast suspect in custody
A suspect wanted in a plot to blow up the U.S. Embassy in Paris has been extradited from Canada and ordered held in a Dutch jail. The Algerian-born suspect, identified in court documents as Amine Mezbar, 34, was brought before a judicial commission Friday in Rotterdam.
--- From news services and staff writer Mary Lou Pickel

Load-Date: July 20, 2002


End of Document