War on terrorism boosts Bernard Lewis and company
USA TODAY
January 24, 2002, Thursday,
FINAL EDITION


Copyright 2002 Gannett Company, Inc.
Section: LIFE;; BOOKS
Length: 440 words
Byline: Bob Minzesheimer
Body

At 85, having written more than 20 books, Bernard Lewis is the Western world's leading Islamic scholar. But he has never had a best seller -- until now.
In the latest sign of how Sept. 11 is changing reading habits, Lewis' What Went Wrong? Western Impact and Middle Eastern Response (Oxford University Press, $ 23) is No. 88 on the USA TODAY Best-Selling Books list.
Published last week, it's already in its fourth printing, with 80,000 copies in print, according to the publisher.
That's nothing compared with the first printing for a John Grisham novel -- 1.5 million copies -- but it's impressive for a scholarly (although readable) history from a university press.
As Lewis, a retired professor of Near Eastern studies at Princeton, puts it, "The Middle East has forced itself on our attention."
His account of the Muslim world's retreat from modernity was completed before Sept. 11. He added only a new preface; the historical backdrop was already there, including a warning: "If the peoples of the Middle East continue on their present path, the suicide bomber may become a metaphor for the whole region."
He says, "I'd rather have been proven wrong, but I wasn't."
Also on the list, at No. 128, is See No Evil: The True Story of a Ground Soldier in the CIA's War on Terrorism (Crown, $ 25.95) by Robert Baer, a former CIA field officer in the Middle East who retired in 1997 and is highly critical of the agency.
Photography books about the heroes of Sept. 11 continue to sell well: One Nation by Life magazine editors is No. 57; Brotherhood, photos of New York firefighters and firehouses, is No. 74.
Now, readers are looking for context. At Doubleday, which is publishing William Bennett's Why We Fight: Moral Clarity and the War on Terrorism in April, editor in chief William Thomas says Sept. 11 was a "dramatic wake-up call that the rest of the world does matter.  . . .  Readers have a new hunger for knowledge and perspective."
Among new books aimed at that audience:
 * The Lessons of Terror (Random House, $ 19.95, out Tuesday ) by Caleb Carr, a military historian and novelist (The Alienist).
 * American Jihad: The Terrorists Living Among Us (Free Press, $ 26, out Feb. 4) by Steven Emerson, who produced the 1994 public TV documentary Jihad in America.
 * Afghanistan: A Short History of Its People and Politics (HarperCollins, $ 25.95, out Feb. 19) by Martin Ewans, a former British diplomat in Afghanistan and Pakistan.
 * Jihad: The Rise of Militant Islam in Central Asia (Yale University Press, $ 24, out Feb. 25) by Ahmed Rashid, a Pakistani journalist. His book Taliban was a best seller last fall.
---
Contributing: Jacqueline Blais

Graphic

 
PHOTOS, B/W (4)

Load-Date: January 24, 2002


End of Document