WAR IN THE GULF: Shock Waves;
70 TERRORIST ACTS OUTSIDE U.S. LISTED
The New York Times
February 1, 1991, Friday, Late Edition - Final


Copyright 1991 The New York Times Company
Distribution: Foreign Desk
Section: Section A;; Section A; Page 11; Column 1; Foreign Desk; Column 1;
Length: 337 words
Byline: By DAVID JOHNSTON, Special to The New York Times

By DAVID JOHNSTON, Special to The New York Times
Dateline: WASHINGTON, Jan. 31
Body


A State Department official said today that about 70 acts of terrorism had been committed against American and allied interests outside the United States since the Persian Gulf war began, including 11 in the last day.
"These incidents have resulted in property damage," said Margaret D. Tutwiler, the State Department spokeswoman. "So far the injuries have been relatively few."
Iraqis have been directly involved in only one of the incidents, a failed attempt to bomb a United States library in Manila on Jan. 19, she said.
The attacks have ranged from the firing of an automatic weapon into gates of the American Embassy in Yemen to an incident in which a hand grenade was lobbed over the wall of Turkish Ambassador's residence in Yemen. No one was hurt.
So far, the attacks have not been definitively linked to well-known Middle East terror groups, but appear to be largely random acts by "kindred spirits" of President Saddam Hussein of Iraq, said Vincent Cannistraro, a former terrorism official at the Central Intelligence Agency.
 
Long-Term Vigilance Urged
 In a separate meeting with reporters, the Federal Bureau of Investigation official in charge of domestic counter-terrorism said increased vigilance would be necessary long after the war ends in the gulf despite the lack of clear evidence of planned terrorist acts in the United States.
"I tell our agents it's a mile or two-mile race, and we are only in the first lap, so you don't want to have any burnout," said William M. Baker, an assistant director at the F.B.I.
The long-term concern is based on the expectation that terrorist groups may decide that the tight security at airports and government buildings will be lowered in the future, allowing terrorists greater freedom of action to attack targets like civilian aircraft.
The gulf crisis has spawned hate crimes against Arab-Americans in the United States, Mr. Baker said. He said the bureau was investigating 26 charges of crimes against Arab-Americans, ranging from threatening phone calls to fire-bombings.

Graphic

 
Photo: About 70 acts of terrorism have been committed against American and allied interests outside the United States, according to the State Department. In Amman, Jordan, yesterday, workers at the French Cultural Center cleaned up after an overnight fire that had been deliberately set. (Associated Press)

Load-Date: February 1, 1991


End of Document