WAR ON TERRORISM ENTERS 2ND PHASE
Pittsburgh Post-Gazette (Pennsylvania)
March 12, 2002 Tuesday
SOONER EDITION


Copyright 2002 P.G. Publishing Co.
Section: NATIONAL,
Length: 601 words
Byline: ANN MCFEATTERS, POST-GAZETTE NATIONAL BUREAU
Dateline: WASHINGTON
Body


Marking the six-months remembrance of the Sept. 11 attacks, President Bush said yesterday that the next phase of the war on terrorism is aimed at denying safe havens to terrorists around the world.
 "Now that the Taliban are gone and al-Qaida has lost its home base for terrorism, we have entered the second stage of the war on terror -- a sustained campaign to deny sanctuary to terrorists who would threaten our citizens from anywhere in the world," Bush said at a solemn ceremony on the South Lawn of the White House.
 "Every nation should know that, for America, the war on terror is not just a policy, it's a pledge… And the terrorists will remember September 11th as the day their reckoning began," he said.
He said the United States expects "governments everywhere to help remove the terrorist parasites that threaten their own countries and peace of the world. If governments need training or resources to meet this commitment, America will help."
 With a bank of 170 colorful, waving flags of nations that have vowed support in the war serving as a backdrop, the president also used the occasion to try to shore up that coalition. There is concern in the White House that the coalition may be developing fissures because of resistance to and confusion over his "axis-of-evil" remarks about Iraq, Iran and North Korea and new international uncertainty over the circumstances that might prompt U.S. use of nuclear weapons.
 Bush emphasized that some states that sponsor terrorism have or are seeking weapons of mass destruction that terrorist groups would use "without a hint of conscience." He said every nation "must take seriously the growing threat of terror on a catastrophic scale -- terror armed with biological, chemical or nuclear weapons. America is now consulting with friends and allies about this greatest of dangers, and we're determined to confront it."
 Such weapons, in the hands of terrorists, "would unleash blackmail and genocide and chaos. These facts cannot be denied and must be confronted. In preventing the spread of weapons of mass destruction, there is no margin for error and no chance to learn from mistakes," he said.
 Bush stressed that an active, "mighty coalition of civilized nations" is the only way to prevent the terrorists from winning. "From the contributions these nations have made -- some well known; others, not -- I am honored to extend the deepest gratitude of the people of the United States," he said.
 The crowd of 1,300 included more than 300 family members of Sept. 11 victims, survivors of the attack on the Pentagon, police and firefighters first on the scene of the disasters, ambassadors, members of Congress and members of the armed forces just rotated back from overseas. Music came from the Harlem Boys Choir, and ambassadors from Turkey, South Korea and Nigeria praised Bush's commitment to the war.
 Bush honored Sept. 11 victims, heroes and those who are risking or have lost their lives in Afghanistan.
 Later, at the Pentagon, where construction crews are working around-the-clock to beat a Sept. 11 deadline to rebuild after the damage left by the crash of a hijacked plane, Defense Secretary Donald Rumsfeld spoke to representatives of 29 members of the coalition against terrorism, noting that men and women from 80 countries were killed Sept. 11.
 After praising the coalition, Rumsfeld said: "But from the ashes hope springs. With the coming of spring, the Pentagon building is rising, and thanks to the truly outstanding effort of the workers, repairs are ahead of schedule. Indeed, from the outside, the building looks like it's almost new."

Notes

THE WAR ON TERROR

Graphic

 
PHOTO: Daneil P. Derella/Associated Press: The "Tribute of Light" to the victims of the World Trade Center attacks blazes in the sky above lower Manhattan last night in this view from Brooklyn. The two pillars of light generated by 88 powerful searchlights installed near Ground Zero fill the void in the nation's most revered skyline left by the destroyed Trade Center towers. They will burn until April 13.

Load-Date: March 12, 2002


End of Document