War is Terrorism
University Wire
March 21, 2003, Friday


Copyright 2003 Daily Egyptian via U-Wire
Section: COLUMN
Length: 698 words
Byline: By Marc Torney, Daily Egyptian
Dateline: Carbondale, Ill.
Body


"You're either with us, or you're with the terrorists." -- George W. Bush
The images of Sept. 11 are etched into our collective memory. The fear, anger, and grief that we all felt watching the senseless end to so many innocent lives will not soon be forgotten. While the infamous attacks of that September morning were broadcast live into our living rooms, they are but one example of the violence terrorists use to inspire fear and hatred. It seems clear that no matter the "cause" that the perpetrator of such violence was fighting for, there can be no justification for mass murder.
Southern Illinois U.
In the aftermath of Sept. 11, the United States went to war, first with Afghanistan, and soon with Iraq in order, it said, to prevent further terrorist acts: in order to keep the peace. In doing so, the United States has violently murdered thousands of innocent civilians in Afghanistan, and the civilian losses will be far greater in Iraq. These murders did not take place on national television, nor did they occur in one fell swoop -- yet they did occur, and at the hands of the U.S. military.
This leads us to the question: Is war different from terrorism? Terrorism is the use of violence or the threat of violence to achieve a political aim. Do our nation's actions fall into this category? Imagine two circumstances. One: Your family member is at work, calmly going about their daily activities, when suddenly their life is ended by a plane crashing into their building. Two: Your family member is at work, calmly going about their daily activities, when suddenly their life is ended by a plane dropping a bomb onto their building. Would you feel immensely different about the two scenarios? Does it matter to you that one is called "terrorism" while the other is called "war?" Does the title make your loved one any less dead?
Dress terror in whatever guise you choose; adorn it with uniforms or wrap it in guerrilla's rags; outfit it with the latest technology, or use leftovers from the last war. Use economic sanctions to starve and maim through lack of medical supplies. Use bombs, planes, guns, or missiles. Take hostages. Torture. Hate. No matter the package death comes in, it is still terror. The U.S. government is quite simply using violence and the threat of violence to force other nations into compliance with its political aims.
Can we justify our attacks on these nations, and more importantly, on their civilian populations? To attempt to do so is an insult to the nearly 3,000 Americans who lost their lives on Sept. 11. If the mass murder of Sept. 11 cannot be justified (and it certainly cannot), then surely all the Sept. 11s created by this country are likewise indefensible. Mass murder is mass murder, no matter who commits it, or for what cause.
When war is waged, it does not only affect another army, other soldiers. Despite the Pentagon's claims about "smart bombs" civilians becoming "collateral damage", war only knows violent weapons and murder. No matter how horrible Saddam Hussein is (and he is quite horrible), most Americans would agree that we have no quarrel with the people of Iraq. Yet, in order to remove Saddam from power, we are willing to accept the loss of countless Iraqi lives, as well as the lives of our own soldiers. What will we gain from this?
Our leaders talk of pragmatic issues: Nation building, liberation, and ridding the world of a menacing tyrant. Yet even if their motives are of the most innocent and benevolent nature (and all evidence shows that they are not), they do not validate the slaughter of thousands or even millions of human beings. Lives that are extinguished halfway around the world are no less valuable then lives half way across our country. We are told that casualties, both civilian and military, are the necessary byproduct of war. Yet would we accept that of our civilian population? How many American lives, not just soldiers, but civilians, would we forfeit for such a venture? Yet our leaders still seek to wage terror.
So, when Bush says, "you're either with us, or you're with the terrorists", remember, the difference is merely a matter of terminology.
(C) 2002 Daily Egyptian via U-WIRE

Load-Date: March 21, 2003


End of Document