WAR ON TERRORISM: 3RD ARMY: Key unit juggles duties in Asia, Middle East
 The Atlanta Journal-Constitution
January 17, 2002 Thursday,
Home Edition


Copyright 2002 The Atlanta Journal-Constitution


Section: News;
Length: 795 words
Byline: RON MARTZ
Body


During the Persian Gulf War, the Atlanta-based 3rd U.S. Army Headquarters faced a formidable task.
The unit from Fort McPherson had a number of missions that ranged from operating seaports in Saudi Arabia to handling prisoners of war. But its primary job was to create an apparatus to support more than 500,000 ground troops from a coalition of 36 nations, then set into motion the plans that eventually defeated Iraq's battle-hardened army in a 100-hour ground war.
The task facing the 3rd Army in the war on terrorism may be even more daunting.
AJC
Not only is it in charge of the ground portion of the war in Afghanistan, it has the responsibility for coordinating humanitarian efforts and overseeing peacekeeping operations in the country even while it continues other duties in the region including the defense of Kuwait and Saudi Arabia.
"We have found ourselves in this mission facing an entirely different set of challenges," said Major Gen. Warren Edwards, deputy commander of the 3rd Army.
The bulk of the 350-soldier unit deployed to the Middle East shortly before Christmas and just days after returning from a two-month exercise in Egypt. Some soldiers had little more than a week at home before being sent back overseas, according to Edwards.
In a recent telephone interview from the region, Edwards would not say where all 3rd Army troops are located. But he said some of its soldiers are in Afghanistan while others are in Uzbekistan, Pakistan, Kuwait, Qatar and Saudi Arabia.
Officials of the 3rd Army say the unit has nearly doubled in size since being sent overseas. The additional soldiers are on temporary assignment from other units or reservists activated for a year for Operation Enduring Freedom.
The 3rd Army serves as the ground component headquarters for U.S. Central Command, which is based in Tampa but has responsibility for military operations in the Middle East and Central Asia. With the addition of troops from other countries, the 3rd Army has become part of what is known by the unwieldy military moniker as Coalition Forces Land Component Command.
But control remains in American hands. Lt. Gen. Paul Mikolashek, 3rd Army commander, is also boss of the coalition command, an arrangement similar to that during the Gulf War when the 3rd Army was commanded by Lt. Gen. John Yeosock, now retired in Peachtree City.
While the 3rd Army's Persian Gulf missions were diverse, the troops of that coalition were in one general location --- northern Saudi Arabia --- arrayed against a single identifiable enemy with one primary mission: Liberate Kuwait.
The unit's mission in the war on terrorism is somewhat more complex. The enemy is not always recognizable, and his whereabouts is often unknown. The war is likely to be spread out over a number of countries. And issues inside Afghanistan such as coordinating efforts with humanitarian organizations, military officials from other countries and a fledgling government often require solutions that can't always be found in training manuals.
Central Command officials say about two dozen nations are operating as part of the coalition in the war on terrorism.
Among the coalition forces inside Afghanistan are Jordanians operating a hospital near Mazar-e-Sharif, French troops providing security for that hospital, Canadian soldiers and U.S. Marines hunting for terrorists and American soldiers from the 10th Mountain Division in Bagram guarding the air base there.
Because of the complexity and diversity of the missions, said Edwards, "Some of it we have learned as we have gone along. It has not been without its challenges."
Making sure the missions of the troops hunting for terrorists and those keeping the peace don't conflict is one of the 3rd Army's responsibilities, as is dealing with the nongovernmental humanitarian organizations that are trying to help Afghanistan survive and rebuild. Edwards said his forces have worked closely with the humanitarian organizations since the start of the war by providing information that helps them do their jobs more efficiently.
"Much of the time it was to provide them with information as to what was safe and what was not safe, what routes were open and what routes were not open," he said.
Officials say that one of the 3rd Army's goals is to transition from a combat role to more of a civil affairs and humanitarian effort.
"We believe we have some capability to assist in the transition from war to a stable government," said Edwards.
How long 3rd Army soldiers will remain deployed is unknown. Some U.S. Army and Marine units have set six-month rotations for their troops. But because of the structure of the 3rd Army, "there is truly no replacement for us. This headquarters will remain in charge of this effort as long as the effort lasts," said Edwards.

Graphic

 
Photo:
Helping to coordinate humanitarian efforts such as distribution of grain in Afghanistan is just one of many duties of the 3rd Army Headquarters based at Fort McPherson. / U.S. Army

Load-Date: January 17, 2002


End of Document