War on terrorism predicted to be long
St. Petersburg Times (Florida)
October 29, 2004 Friday


Copyright 2004 Times Publishing Company
Section: CLEARWATER TIMES; Pg. 7
Length: 637 words
Byline: TERRI BRYCE REEVES
Dateline: CLEARWATER
Body


Brace yourselves. The global war on terror is going to be a long one.
That's the message delivered by Air Force Col. Stephen M. Keen, U.S. Central Command's chief of the Reserve Forces Division at MacDill Air Force Base in Tampa.
In his desert battle dress uniform and boots, Keen looked ready for combat on Wednesday, even though there was no enemy in sight.  Just a large group of mostly retired military officers and their spouses, members of the Clearwater chapter of Military Officers Association of America.
They had come to the Cove Cay Country Club to enjoy lunch and hear about military operations in Afghanistan and Iraq.
Keen, a 35-year military veteran, began by clearing up what he considered a common misconception.
"We are not in the military to fight; we are here because we want to have peace," he said to much applause.
He told the audience that the war on terror was being won with every terrorist captured, every free election held and with every playground and school built.
Keen was pinch-hitting for Maj. Gen. James W. Comstock, CENTCOM's reserve component adviser and exercise director at MacDill, who was scheduled to give the presentation but was called to Washington, D.C., for a last-minute meeting.
Keen said CENTCOM's goal is more than tackling terrorism. Over the long term, it includes promoting regional stability, maintaining access to the region's resources and markets, countering weapons of mass destruction and securing democracy and a lasting peace.
Keen noted that CENTCOM's areas of responsibility include 27 culturally diverse nations located throughout South and Central Asia, the Northern Red Sea regions, the Arabian peninsula and the Horn of Africa.
Those areas are populated by 651-million people, members of 18 ethnic groups and 12 major religions.
The three biggest operations include multinational forces in Iraq, Afghanistan and the Horn of Africa, he said.
Keen lauded the fact that Iraq's former regime was abolished. Now he said challenges include establishing stability, enabling Iraqi elections, overcoming decades of neglect, eliminating foreign fighters, terrorists, criminals and former regime strongholds.
Keen used a slide show to depict how guardsmen and reservists were building playgrounds, roads, schools, bridges and canals in Iraq and Afghanistan.
He said media portrayals tend to focus on the bloodshed and fighting.
"We are making progress despite what you're seeing on TV or reading in the newspapers or hearing on the radio," he said.
And despite media focus on the war in Iraq, Afghanistan has not been forgotten.
"Make no mistake, we are still conducting significant operations there," he said.
Much of the military's efforts are also focused on the Horn of Africa, in which nations such as Ethiopia, Kenya, Somalia, and Sudan are considered targets for terrorist networks.
"We are focused on disrupting and defeating efforts of terrorists who are migrating to the Horn, an escape route for al-Qaida and other groups," he said. "We are also conducting humanitarian efforts there."
Keen reviewed the impetus for Operation Enduring Freedom, the military's response to the string of terrorist attacks, which began in the United States in 1993, with the first assault on the World Trade Center.
With his graphic slide show, he demonstrated how terror attacks have since escalated.
"They hate us, hate our values and hate our love of freedom," he said. "Lord forbid what is next."
Members of the audience wanted to know if any Muslims really wanted peace and were willing to compromise.
Keen acknowledged that he did not know first hand; he hasn't been to Iraq. But he has formed an opinion based on what he has heard.
"I believe there are many moderate Islamists and Muslims that are peace-loving and believe in freedom," he said. "The problem is getting the good news out there."

Load-Date: October 29, 2004


End of Document