War against terrorism turns into big drag on economy
The Columbian (Vancouver, WA.)
September 26, 2003, Friday


Copyright 2003 The Columbian Publishing Co.
Section: Business; Pg. e1
Length: 475 words
Byline: MARTIN CRUTSINGER, Associated Press writer
Body


WASHINGTON -- Two years into the war on terrorism, hopes that the struggle would be only a brief drag on the economy are fading.
Businesses and consumers are facing a growing list of security-related burdens, the federal deficit is ballooning from increased military spending and Americans are jittery about the future.
Many analysts believe that the first decade of the 21st century could well be a mirror-opposite of the 1990s.
Back then, the country reaped a huge "peace dividend" as gushers of money freed after America won the Cold War were diverted from the military to private enterprise.
Those business investments helped spur a record-long 10 years of economic expansion and a surge in productivity to levels not seen in decades. But now, Congress is debating President Bush's request for an additional $ 87 billion for the Iraq occupation, and soaring spending on defense and homeland security has brought back the era of massive budget deficits.
"If you add everything up, a significant weight has been placed on the economy," said Mark Zandi, chief economist at Economy.com. "Going forward, we are just not going to see the kind of investment and productivity growth we would have had because we are devoting so much more to defense and homeland security."
The increased government borrowing estimated to total $ 1.39 trillion over the next decade will drive up interest rates not only for consumers trying to buy new homes and cars but also for businesses. That will make it more expensive for companies to get the money they need to expand and modernize, the kind of investment that boosts productivity.
All the government spending does have benefits, especially in the current period when the lingering effects of the past recession mean there is plenty of slack in labor markets and production.
Zandi estimates that economic growth will be nearly 0.7 percent higher this year because of spending on defense and homeland security, outlays that have jumped by 36 percent since 2000 and will total an estimated $ 627 billion this year after adjusting for inflation.
But the increased emphasis on security has also created new problems for businesses.
At a time when U.S. manufacturing is already in a deep slump with 2.7 million job lost over the last three years, American companies are having trouble obtaining visas to get customers into the country to inspect everything from jet airliners to machine tools.
Chip Storie, a vice president at Cincinnati Machine, said one of the company's top Chinese customers is now considering switching to a Japanese or European competitor because it took six months to get the visas needed to travel to Cincinnati to inspect a $ 5 million machine tool purchase.
And tourism, already hard hit since the 9/11 attacks, is losing business to other countries because foreigners must wait so long to obtain travel visas.

Load-Date: September 28, 2003


End of Document