War not about terrorism
University Wire
October 25, 2004 Monday


Copyright 2004 Oklahoma Daily via U-Wire
Section: COLUMN
Length: 524 words
Byline: By Rachel Muchmore, Oklahoma Daily; SOURCE: U. Oklahoma
Dateline: NORMAN, Okla. 
Body


The moral arguments for and against the war in Iraq have been all but exhausted. Although I have my views about what is morally right and wrong in terms of what was done in Iraq, I would like to advance a more practical argument against the war in Iraq.
Unlike Afghanistan, we did not have credible evidence that the government of Saddam Hussein was linked with the attacks of 9/11. Even Rumsfeld admitted that there is no "strong, hard evidence" linking the two (Reuters). What little evidence there is has been used to say that Saddam Hussein would be willing to give weapons of mass destruction to terrorists, but this claim sounds a little unstable.
According to Steve Coll's book "Ghost Wars," Osama bin Laden was against the regime of Saddam Hussein because it was secular. Why would a brutal dictator willing to kill anyone who might be a threat to his regime want to aid a terrorist group who opposed him?
Now, if retaliation was not justified, what about the ex post facto argument about the "freedom" of the Iraqi people? Democracy is not something that can be imposed, because even if elections are carried out in January the leader who is elected is likely not to have legitimacy in the eyes of the Iraqi people. They would see him as backed by the United States.
If we truly give them the choice of a leader, they run the risk of the majority overpowering the minorities in a system that could turn out to be as unfair and brutal as the regime of Hussein.
What would the supporters of the war have to say if elections created a theocracy in Iraq?
They say a stable, democratic Iraq will be a great influence on the Middle East. We have destabilized the country and created a rallying point for terrorists.
There is evidence that there are actually more terrorists in Iraq today than before the war (which would make sense due to the fact that the infrastructure was destroyed). We are not heading toward a democracy in Iraq, but toward another sham regime backed by foreign power or another theocracy.
Some say that freedom comes with risks. Supporters of the war pride themselves on fighting for freedom no matter what it takes. But freedom is not so tangible, and we are not the only ones affected when we take those risks.
With all our American hubris, we assume without question to know what is best for the rest of the world.
This is not Germany. This is not Japan. The war on terror is not World War II. We must understand the difference between conventional wars and the war on terror.
The truth is that we alone do not have the resources to invade and occupy every country we suspect of having links with terrorists.
We must admit our limits and work with other countries. Those who are for the war in Iraq have been trying to demoralize those of us against it by saying we want to be popular with the rest of the world instead of standing up for what is right.
Author David Horowitz has even said those of us on the left are in alliance with the terrorists. But we are truly concerned with reducing the threat of terrorism, and we are willing to admit America's shortcomings in order to achieve that goal.
(C) 2003 Oklahoma Daily via U-WIRE

Load-Date: October 25, 2004


End of Document