WAR ON TERRORISM: CRISIS DEVELOPMENTS;
Latest news from here and abroad
 The Atlanta Journal-Constitution
April 2, 2002 Tuesday,
Home Edition


Copyright 2002 The Atlanta Journal-Constitution


Section: News;; Brief
Length: 527 words
Body


Pakistan turns al-Qaida leader over to U.S.
Pakistani authorities have handed over to the United States a man considered the biggest catch yet in the war on terrorism: Abu Zubaydah, a senior al-Qaida leader believed to be heading an attempt to reconstitute the group in Pakistan, officials said. The man has acknowledged he is Zubaydah, according to a senior Pakistani intelligence official and others familiar with his capture. Several of his former associates identified him from photographs, U.S. officials said. He would be the highest-ranking leader in the terrorist organization to fall into American hands since the Sept. 11 attacks. Defense Secretary Donald Rumsfeld said Zubaydah is either the No. 2 man in Osama bin Laden's terrorist group or "very close to the No. 2 person in the organization."
AJC REPORTS AND NEWS SERVICESPolice to scan fliers
Local law enforcement officers must be available to patrol airport security checkpoints by the end of the month, according to a Transportation Security Administration directive issued Monday. The TSA sent the notice to the nation's 429 commercial airports. The move comes as the National Guard begins to withdraw from airport patrols begun after Sept. 11. Hartsfield International Airport was one of the first to reach an agreement with the TSA for the transition, TSA spokesman Paul Turk said. The TSA will pay $4.5 million for off-duty Atlanta police officers to patrol checkpoints through November 2003, Turk said.
 
Allies fire on troops
Disgruntled Northern Alliance soldiers were blamed Monday for two recent shootings in Afghanistan that targeted international peacekeepers. A convoy of British soldiers was fired on Saturday evening by two men as the troops made their way along a dirt path toward an observation post in western Kabul, and an armored patrol of German peacekeepers was fired on Friday from a Northern Alliance compound in another part of the city. No one was hurt in either incident.
 
Suspect admits plot
A man has pleaded guilty in Charlotte to conspiring to funnel money, weapons and supplies to the Hezbollah terrorist group and will testify against other defendants, prosecutors said Monday. Said Mohamad Harb, 31, pleaded guilty to conspiracy Feb. 25 and a charge of providing material support to a known terrorist organization was dropped, U.S. Attorney Robert Conrad said.
 
Alert still 'yellow'
The Bush administration is considering whether Middle East violence heightens the risk of terrorism on U.S. soil, but is keeping the nationwide alert status at "yellow" for now, officials said Monday.
 
Shots may resume
The Pentagon is considering resuming anthrax vaccinations for U.S. troops now that the nation's sole maker of the vaccine has been cleared to resume production. Defense Secretary Donald Rumsfeld said Monday he was awaiting a recommendation on how and when to resume an inoculation program. He said the details were being considered by Gen. Richard Myers, chairman of the Joint Chiefs of Staff. On Jan. 31, the Food and Drug Administration approved BioPort's new manufacturing plant to produce anthrax vaccine. --- From reports by staff writer Mary Lou Pickel and news services

Load-Date: April 2, 2002


End of Document