WAR ON TERRORISM EMBOLDENS ASHCROFT;
 JOHN ASHCROFT'S RECORD AS ATTORNEY GENERAL
St. Louis Post-Dispatch (Missouri)
May 19, 2002 Sunday Five Star Lift Edition


Copyright 2002 St. Louis Post-Dispatch, Inc.
Section: NEWSWATCH; Pg. B1; PROFILE; ATTORNEY GENERAL JOHN ASHCROFT
Length: 1689 words
Byline: Karen Branch-Brioso Post-Dispatch Washington Bureau
Dateline: WASHINGTON
Body


THE NEWS: Since Sept. 11, Attorney General John Ashcroft has grown less cautious in pursuing his policy objectives, particularly his goal of preventing terrorism.
THE ISSUE: The attorney general is enjoying favorable public approval ratings and a new public confidence as President George W. Bush turns to him as a point man on the war on terrorism. Critics say Ashcroft has grown too bold in supporting a conservative agenda.
On Oct. 31, Attorney General John Ashcroft quietly gave himself the power to order federal investigators to monitor prisoners' conversations with lawyers. He made no public pronouncement; the notice was posted in a thick register of federal rules. The Justice Department was mum on the subject until news outlets uncovered it days later.
Yet there was nothing shy about Ashcroft's April 9 announcement that he was using that power for the first time.
"We will not ignore those who claim rights for themselves while they seek to destroy the rights of others," he said in a New York news conference at which he announced the indictment of a convicted terrorist's lawyer. "We will, in the president's words, 'defend freedom and justice, no matter what the cost.'"
Ashcroft's bold, almost defiant tone in the face of criticism from civil-rights advocates was a far cry from the publicity-reluctant stance the attorney general had shown five months earlier. His new public confidence has emerged steadily as President George W. Bush continues to tap him as a key point man for the war on terror.
St. Louis lawyer Charles Polk, a longtime friend, noted the change in Ashcroft's demeanor during a visit last month to the attorney general's Pennsylvania Avenue office.
"He still seems to be preoccupied with the events of 9-11, but he seemed very confident, like a person who knows where he's going. He's gotten more familiar with the surroundings of the Justice Department," Polk said. "Here I was sitting with a guy who's in the middle of a firestorm every day and, yet, it was amazing to see how calm, cool and collected he is."
With self-assurance born of 15 months on the job and high public approval ratings, Ashcroft has left behind the tentative stage of his transition from senator to executive. And that boldness hasn't been just about terrorism. Ashcroft has placed his conservative stamp on the Justice Department's handling of gun rights, child pornography and assisted suicide.
His critics call it pure politicking, an attempt to satisfy conservative Republicans. His public affairs office - led by a communications director whose last job was to dig up dirt on Democrats for the GOP - said Ashcroft is simply enforcing the law.
One Republican pollster says Ashcroft's newfound aggressiveness is smart in an election year, no matter what the reason.
"The stronger the president is, in terms of his ratings, the more it enables a guy like the attorney general to step out a little further," said Neil Newhouse, the Washington-based GOP pollster. "The positions he has taken have been relatively conservative and that does nothing but reinforce the conservative base across the country."
Sen. Russ Feingold of Wisconsin was one of only a few Democrats to vote in favor of Ashcroft's confirmation. He now believes Ashcroft has usurped too much power, though he blames the White House.
"It's the president who's directing traffic here," said Feingold, who said he negotiated with Ashcroft a part of the agreement on a new anti-terrorism law - only to be overruled by the White House. "Those who are critical of Ashcroft are, in my view, foolishly letting the president off the hook for domestic policies."
But even some critics of Ashcroft have been quick to add praise.
Unlike Feingold, Sen. Dick Durbin, D-Ill., voted against Ashcroft's confirmation. And he has voiced complaints with Ashcroft policies - particularly when the attorney general ordered FBI investigators not to inspect gun-purchasing records to see whether any of those arrested in the post-Sept. 11 sweep had bought guns.
Still, Durbin gives high marks to Ashcroft's performance since the terrorist attacks.
"I thought that John Ashcroft's record as a senator was a bad omen," Durbin said. "Yet while I do disagree with some things he's done, on balance, he's shown a real force and determination. I think he faced an extraordinary challenge and he's doing his best to face a historic challenge."
A consuming mission
Although issues like guns and assisted suicide have also been part of Ashcroft's agenda, his major focus has been to prevent future acts of terrorism. Each day that President George W. Bush is in town, Ashcroft and FBI Director Robert Mueller are at the White House before 8 a.m. for a security briefing culled from FBI and CIA intelligence.
"I'd say that 50 to 75 percent of his time is now spent on anti-terrorism matters. The rest of it is spent on other business of the department," said David Israelite, Ashcroft's deputy chief of staff.
In the six weeks after the attacks, Ashcroft spent most every waking hour in the FBI building across the street from his Justice Department office. He now makes infrequent visits to the FBI, for briefings - or a spirited game of pickup basketball in the FBI gym.
He is also traveling the country again, as he did prior to Sept. 11 in get-acquainted visits at U.S. attorneys' offices. Ashcroft has traveled to at least 20 cities since Dec. 3, when those visits resumed. Now, however, most of those trips have an added purpose: to check in on local anti-terrorism task forces that he ordered established for every U.S. attorney's office and every FBI field office.
Strong public approval
Despite the consistent aura of controversy that surrounds Ashcroft, the great bulk of the public believes he's doing a good job, according to recent national polls.
During the contentious days of his confirmation hearings in January 2001, a CNN-USA Today-Gallup poll showed a 34 percent favorable rating for Ashcroft. In the same poll, 53 percent said they didn't even know enough about him to say whether he should be confirmed.
Contrast that to a Gallup poll early this spring that pegged his popularity at 76 percent. A more recent poll, conducted April 25 by the American Research Group, showed that a still-strong number - 61 percent - think Ashcroft is doing a good or excellent job as attorney general.
The nation's courts, however, have not been so kind.
Civil rights groups have won early battles in a series of lawsuits against Ashcroft:
* A federal judge in New York ruled that the Justice Department should not jail material witnesses to keep them for grand jury testimony in its terrorism sweep.
* A New Jersey judge said the department must release the names of immigration detainees held in the post-Sept. 11 sweep. Ashcroft has refused to release their names, saying it would be tantamount to "mailing this list to the Osama bin Laden al-Qaida network."
* Another federal judge ruled that it was unconstitutional for the Justice Department to close the deportation hearings of a man in Michigan accused of starting a charity to help fund terrorists.
The Justice Department is appealing all of the rulings.
The increasing secrecy at the already closed-mouth department is one of the biggest gripes of Ashcroft's critics.
"There is no basis for not being open," said Sen. Feingold. "The administration and the Justice Department has sadly decided to go for a maximum secrecy approach. They're using every opportunity to block information from the public."
Ashcroft set a tone for secrecy back on Oct. 12, when he issued a memo to all federal officials whose job it is to provide government documents to the public through the Freedom of Information Act. Those officials who opt to withhold records, Ashcroft wrote, "can be assured that the Department of Justice will defend your decisions unless they lack a sound legal basis."
Ashcroft offers frequent news conferences to issue announcements, but offers rare - and brief - interviews to reporters. He has not responded to repeated requests by the Post-Dispatch for an interview. Some exceptions: He has granted lengthy interview time with CNN's Larry King; was a guest of CBS's late-night talk-show host David Letterman; and gave Parade magazine a hourlong interview for a profile that appears in Sunday's issue.
"Significantly stronger"
Time after time, when the Bush White House looks for a point man on anti-terrorism, it looks to John Ashcroft.
Although Homeland Security chief Tom Ridge announced a new, color-coded terrorist alert system, it was Ashcroft who announced an actual alert - and its color - last month, when the government warned of threats to banks in the northeast.
It hasn't just been the White House that looks to Ashcroft. The USA Patriot Act swept through Congress in the wake of the Sept. 11 attacks to give the Justice Department broad new power to conduct searches and wiretaps and tap into e-mails of terrorism suspects - and those who linked to terrorism suspects. Ashcroft also gained personal power to detain noncitizens whom he deemed to be terrorism suspects.
Newhouse, the Republican pollster, said Ashcroft's eagerness to take controversial positions - and the heat that comes with them - has also boosted his reputation in positive ways.
"As a senator, he had some strength, but not enough to do much with in a national election," Newhouse said. "But now I think he's significantly stronger. He's helped himself with the bases in the Republican Party across the board."
Ashcroft's own national political aspirations surfaced during his brief Senate career. He was the darling for the Christian right as he tested the waters for a presidential bid, then dropped out in 1999.
But Ashcroft, who turned 60 on May 9, has dismissed any talk of a political future.
"Knowing him, he would be upset that anybody would be talking about that right now," said Polk, Ashcroft's friend and adviser during his confirmation hearings.
"He respects the president immensely. The reverence he has for that man I've never seen before. Anything else right now is irrelevant. He is focused for doing a good job for President Bush. That's the thrill of his life."

Notes

ATTORNEY GENERAL JOHN ASHCROFT; Reporter Karen Branch-Brioso covers the Justice Department for the Post-Dispatch.; Reporter Karen Branch-Brioso; E-mail: kbranch@post-dispatch.com; Phone: 202-298-6880  

Graphic

 
PHOTO; Color PHOTO by THE ASSOCIATED PRESS - Attorney General John Ashcroft addresses the media on Tuesday at the U.S. attorney's office in Phoenix. Ashcroft's visits to U.S. attorneys' offices have focused on checking in on local anti-terrorism task forces that he ordered established for every U.S. attorney's office and every FBI field office.

Load-Date: June 5, 2002


End of Document