War on terrorism fails to defeat political pork
USA TODAY
June 12, 2002, Wednesday,
FINAL EDITION


Copyright 2002 Gannett Company, Inc.
Section: NEWS;; DEBATE
Length: 541 words
Body

Today's debate: Misplaced priorities
Our view: Democrats, GOP hide pet projects in defense, security spending.
There's a war on. The government's accounts are already in the red.
Yet Democrats and Republicans in Washington are brazenly using the war on terrorism as an excuse to raid the federal Treasury for election-year politics.
In the next few days, the House and Senate are supposed to work out an emergency funding plan to fight terrorism at home and abroad. Too bad much of the debate is over home-state projects.
Of the $ 31.5 billion budgeted for defense and homeland security, more than 15% does little to address either need. The profligate spending pushes up the already-ballooning federal deficit. The result is more government borrowing, upward pressure on interest rates and less money to fund more pressing needs that don't have the same political clout.
Both the House and Senate are guilty of needlessly padding the budget for the war on terror. They could agree to cut it out. But Congress' usual practice is to accommodate everyone, at taxpayers' expense.
The Senate, for example, included $ 2.5 million for mapping coral reefs in Hawaii, $ 2 million for new storage in Maryland for the Smithsonian Institution's animal specimens, and $ 50 million for an animal-disease lab in Iowa. Worthy projects in some eyes, no doubt, but dubious excuses for costly borrowing under cloak of the war on terrorism.
Then there's $ 10 million for Texas farmers and ranchers hurt by a water dispute with Mexico, $ 500,000 to study diseased birds in Georgia, and $ 73 million for flood relief in five states from Illinois to Virginia.
Selling these programs as security spending is a stretch. But their political purpose is clear: Most of this largesse is targeted at states where close congressional or gubernatorial races are shaping up this fall.
The House version is similarly padded. Under the mantle of fighting terrorism, lawmakers want to boost Medicare payments for select hospitals in Pennsylvania and New York. Redistricting there has left a number of incumbents eager to impress new constituents with their ability to tap the Treasury for parochial needs. Party leaders are happy to use the taxpayers' money to oblige.
The political spending spree could have been worse. Efforts to add $ 10 billion for Medicaid, a new social-services block grant, another bailout for selected farmers and even federal funding for local summer schools were turned back.
Senior lawmakers congratulate each other on the $ 28 billion allocated for defense and homeland security. They don't talk about the extra spending they embraced.
Those are classic signs of denial. Yet lawmakers well know that the lush days of surpluses are over. A $ 150-billion to $ 200-billion deficit is on the horizon for this year.
There are very real needs to be funded in the fight against terrorism. But the days of spending on programs designed to win votes ought to be over.
Last week President Bush's aides and Vice President Cheney threatened to block excessive spending. That's a threat the president needs to make personally and be prepared to carry out.
The war on terrorism requires not only the costly pursuit of the bad guys, but also hard choices in spending taxpayers' money.

Graphic

 
GRAPHIC, B/W, Adrienne Lewis, USA TODAY, Sources: Congressional Budget Office and the Concord Coalition (BAR GRAPH)

Load-Date: June 12, 2002


End of Document