WAR IN THE GULF: Travel;
FEAR OF TERRORISM IS CURBING TRAVEL
The New York Times
January 28, 1991, Monday, Late Edition - Final


Copyright 1991 The New York Times Company
Distribution: Foreign Desk
Section: Section A;; Section A; Page 1; Column 5; Foreign Desk; Column 5;
Length: 1082 words
Byline: By EBEN SHAPIRO

By EBEN SHAPIRO
Body


Frightened by the threat of terrorism and preoccupied with the war against Iraq, Americans are canceling vacation plans and choosing to stay close to home.
In the clearest indication yet of the war's effects on the economy, operators of group tours, airlines and cruise lines all report an increase in cancellations and a drop in bookings since United States-led forces started attacking Iraq on Jan. 17.
While many canceled trips involved travel to the Middle East and Europe, people are also postponing other overseas flights as well as domestic vacations that involve air travel. Foreign travel to the United States has also fallen off.
Concern about flying anywhere is the reason most often given for canceling trips. But some people say they are staying home for other reasons as well. Some potential travelers are riveted to their television sets, captivated by the constant news reports about the war, a condition that some people are calling the "CNN effect."
One traveler staying home is Chuck Santoro, who runs an insurance agency in Bergenfield, N.J.. He canceled a family trip to New Orleans for Mardi Gras.
"It is not really a great time to party," he said. Mr. Santoro said he was worried about being part of the unruly mass of people that gather to celebrate Mardi Gras. "Who knows what could happen?" he said. "Somebody could chuck a bomb in there."
Tourism to New York, Washington and other large cities has fallen as people try to avoid potential targets of terrorism.
Along with the drop in tourism has come a reduction in business travel, reflecting both the recession and corporate bans on international travel because of the war.
Whether more Americans will take vacations this year in the family car, staying at hotels and motels or camping out, is impossible to determine yet. Even if such trips are planned six months in advance, few people make reservations that early. So that shift in vacation plans would not turn up in hard numbers.
Indeed, precise numbers on the changing travel patterns are difficult to come by, and January and February are generally the slowest travel months of the year anyway. Still, many hotels and airlines say customers are making reservations at levels below their projections. In the cruise industry, January is the most important month, in terms of reservations being made. A bad January could have repercussions for the rest of the year.
 
Cruise Cancellations
 Carnival Cruise Lines Inc. in Miami is the nation's largest cruise operator, with numerous vacations to the Caribbean. It says it is receiving 10 to 20 cancellations a day, compared with 3 or 4 daily last January.
Bookings through American Express travel agents have dropped by nearly 10 percent since the beginning of the year. "It is a significant drop in a very short period of time," said Roger H. Ballou, president of the Travel Services Group, a division of the American Express Company.
The packaged-tour business at the Carlson Travel Network dropped 40 percent after war broke out, said Ronald Letterman, president of the travel agency and tour operator in Minneapolis. "The week after the war started, our advance bookings just stopped."
Other travel executives agree that travel plans seem frozen since the war began. "People are just putting their trips on hold," said Charles D. Platt, president of Alamo Rent a Car Inc. in Fort Lauderdale, Fla. If people do not fly, he said, they do not rent cars.
The drop in vacations comes at a bad time for the travel industry, which was already bracing for a rough year because of the recession. Companies in the travel business say it is too early to tell how long the slowdown will last and if it will lead to layoffs or other cost-cutting measures.
Many airlines have ended flights to the Middle East, and some have announced plans to cut flights to Europe. Trans World Airways said it would halt up to half its overseas flights. Delta Air Lines has canceled its daily Cincinnati-to-Paris flight, and airline industry analysts said similar moves by other carriers were likely.
 
Fewer London Flights
 British Airways has trimmed flights in the face of falling demand. The airline is now flying two rather than three flights a day between New York and London. One of the two Concorde flights on Sundays has been canceled. A spokesman for British Airways said the war was compounding the ecomomic slowdown. "It will have an effect on revenues and profitability," said John Lampl, an airline spokesman.
British Airways has pulled its advertising. But to combat slack demand, it began offering a special $249 round-trip fare for New York to London through travel agents last week.
Several airlines, including United and American, have relaxed their penalties for canceling flights. Travelers concerned about flying can exchange their tickets for vouchers that can be traded for tickets during the year.
Even before the terrorism scare, hotels had been offering discounted room packages to attract guests. John Fox of the accounting firm Pannell Kerr Forster said the industry would face additional pressure to cut rates if the slowdown continued.
 
'Nobody Really Wants to Travel'
 Several large cruise operators canceled cruises to Europe this week when reservations failed to materialize because of safety concerns. Princess Cruises in Los Angeles decided this week not to send a second cruise ship to Europe this summer as planned, because the war had depressed bookings.
Crystal Cruises also decided not to sail to Europe this summer. "Nobody really wants to travel across the Atlantic," said Arthur Sbarsky, senior vice president of marketing for the Los Angeles-based company.
The war has also altered the course of the Cunard Line's Queen Elizabeth 2. The ship will not go through the Suez Canal or stop at any Mediterranean ports. Instead, the ocean liner will steam around Africa as part of an around-the-world cruise.
There are some indications that people may choose to take short driving vacations to areas close to home. Since war broke out, "the phones are ringing a heck of a lot more than they had been," said Bobbi Doren of the Pines Resort Hotel in South Fallsburg, N.Y., a family resort in the Catskills two hours from New York City. "It is closer to home," she said.
 
Traffic on Amtrak
 An Amtrak spokesman said yesterday that it could not be determined if its ridership had changed since the war began. Passenger traffic on the rail system has increased 2 percent to 3 percent since the Iraqi invasion of Kuwait in August, he said.

Load-Date: January 29, 1991


End of Document