WAR ON TERRORISM: CRISIS DEVELOPMENTS;
Latest news from here and abroad
 The Atlanta Journal-Constitution
February 28, 2002 Thursday,
Metro Edition


Copyright 2002 The Atlanta Journal-Constitution


Section: News;; Brief
Length: 414 words
Body


Device failed terror mock-ups
The $1 million machines the government plans to deploy by the hundreds to scan airline baggage for bombs have been foiled repeatedly by undercover teams simulating terrorists, a veteran federal agent charged Wednesday.
"We were extraordinarily successful in mock-destroying aircraft and killing large numbers of innocent people in . . . simulated attacks," said Bogdan Dzakovic, supervisor of a Federal Aviation Administration team that tested security. "This occurred with such regularity and ease as to present a frightening picture of the sorry state of aviation security on a worldwide basis. This was all before 9/11."
AJC REPORTS AND NEWS SERVICES'Hotel radio' a lie
A guard at a World Trade Center-area hotel pleaded guilty to lying about finding an aviation radio inside a locked safe in an Egyptian student's room. The lie mistakenly connected the student to the Sept. 11 attacks and left him jailed for a month.
 
Memorial in light
Two beams of light will rise from near the World Trade Center site as a temporary memorial to the victims. Groups supporting victims' families say the "Tribute of Light" will run between March 11 and April 13. ON THE WEB: www.creativetime.org/towers/background.html 
 
An aid to agencies
Rep. Saxby Chambliss (R-Ga.) and the House Subcommittee on Terrorism and Homeland Security that he heads will introduce bipartisan legislation today to improve cooperation and fact-sharing between federal, state and local agencies. Chambliss and the ranking Democrat on the subcommittee, California Rep. Jane Harman, will discuss the bill at a news conference in Washington.
 
Mission duration?
Sen. Robert C. Byrd (D-W.Va.), chairman of the Senate Appropriations Committee, pressed Pentagon officials for details on how long U.S. troops might stay in Afghanistan, complaining "there's no end in sight in our mission."
 
Detained over IDs
A New Jersey man is being held without bail on charges he participated in a fake ID ring that included two of the Sept. 11 hijackers.
 
Charges at Logan
Twenty workers at Logan International Airport, including six security screeners, were charged with lying to get their jobs or security badges.
 
Marine honored
The first U.S. Marine to receive a Purple Heart for service during the war on terrorism in Afghanistan was honored by the Colorado Legislature. Cpl. Christopher Chandler, 21, lost his foot when he stepped on a mine. --- Staff writer Melanie Eversley and news services contributed to this article.

Graphic

 
Photo:
Indonesian bombing suspect Fathur Rohman Al-Ghozi (center) went on trial Wednesday in Manila, Philippines. / ED WRAY / Associated Press

Load-Date: February 28, 2002


End of Document