War and Terrorist Threats Notwithstanding, the World Really Is Safer
The Chronicle of Higher Education
November 25, 2005, Friday


Copyright 2005 The Chronicle of Higher Education
Section: RESEARCH; Pg. 24
Length: 431 words
Byline: PETER MONAGHAN
Body


Andrew Mack, director, Human Security Center, University of British Columbia
The world has become more secure. That's the surprising claim of Human Security Report 2005: War and Peace in the 21st Century, which Mr. Mack and his colleagues have published with Oxford University Press. The report concludes that most forms of political violence have declined significantly since the cold war, thanks largely to United Nations efforts at conflict resolution.
Q. Is the world really safer?
A. Political violence is down across the board &#8212; wars, genocides, military coups, international crises. The sole exception is international terrorism. Serious international terrorist incidents have increased dramatically. But it's important to note that terrorism has killed fewer than 1,000 people a year over the past 30 years &#8212; a tiny fraction of the number killed in wars.
Q. What numbers demonstrate that?
A. Wars are down by 40 percent since 1992 after increasing every decade since the 1940s. The deadliest wars decreased by 80 percent. Wars are far less deadly than they were. In 1950 the average conflict killed some 38,000 people; in 2002 it was just 600. Genocides and politicides are down by nearly 80 percent over a slightly longer period. Military coups are down by 60 percent since the mid-1960s.
Q. So why do we believe that the world is in increasingly dire straits?
A. First, the media focus on wars that begin rather than those that quietly end. It's the "If it bleeds, it leads" syndrome. Second, there are no official statistics to provide a corrective. Third, human-rights and humanitarian groups draw our attention to what is still bad &#8212; not what is getting better.
Q. Doesn't the existence of nuclear, chemical, and biological weapons increase the likelihood of mass killing?
A. It's a real possibility, but it is actually much more difficult to make weapons of mass destruction than popular accounts would suggest.
Q. Why is so little attention given to these statistics?
A. Mostly because people don't know about them, though some who do worry that publicizing the decline may lead to donors becoming complacent.
Q. Does talk of global jeopardy simply register the fears of the West, while people in many war-torn parts of the world live every day in terror?
A. There is little doubt that the disproportionate amount of attention in Western capitals and the media that international terrorism receives is because Westerners are often the targets of the terrorists. But it is also true that people can be amazingly resilient in the face of widespread political violence.

Load-Date: November 22, 2005


End of Document