War on terrorism heats up;
Bin Laden reportedly indicted by grand jury
The Atlanta Journal and Constitution
August 25, 1998, Tuesday,
JOURNAL EDITION


Copyright 1998 The Atlanta Constitution
Section: NEWS; Pg. 01a
Length: 416 words
Series: Today's News
Dateline: New York
Body


A federal grand jury has secretly indicted Osama bin Laden, the Saudi millionaire believed responsible for the deadly U.S. embassy bombings in Africa, news organizations reported today. The sealed indictment, charging bin Laden with soliciting murder, came weeks before the Aug. 7 bombings of U.S. embassies in Nairobi, Kenya, and Dar es Salaam, Tanzania, the Associated Press said, citing an unidentified source.
AP reported that a grand jury in U.S. District Court in Manhattan indicted bin Laden several weeks ago.
The Washington Post, quoting unnamed senior U.S. officials, said today that the indictment would provide grounds for Bin Laden's capture and removal to the United States to stand trial, and could be used to persuade foreign governments to deny him protection from arrest. The indictment came after evidence was presented that bin Laden had called publicly for acts of violence against U.S. citizens, including murder, AP said. The grand jury was convened after 19 U.S. service personnel were killed when a bomb exploded in June 1996 at a military apartment complex in Saudi Arabia. There were suspicions that bin Laden had a connection with the terrorist act.
The attacks on the African embassies prompted the United States to retaliate Thursday by firing missiles at a training camp for militants linked to bin Laden in eastern Afghanistan and at a pharmaceutical plant in Khartoum, Sudan. Experts say bin Laden, the son of a Saudi construction magnate, has funded attacks against the United States.
Newsday reported today that on at least two occasions bin Laden directed his followers to assassinate President Clinton.
The New York newspaper, quoting anonymous "counterterrorism and intelligence sources," said the first assassination attempt was to have been when Clinton visited the Philippines to begin a five-day trip to Asia in November 1994 but was aborted because of the high security surrounding the president. The second was to have been in Pakistan this February, when Clinton had planned --- but later canceled --- a visit to the Indian subcontinent, Newsday said, quoting a source familiar with what a suspect in the Kenya bombing has been telling the FBI. Ramzi Yousef, later convicted in the 1993 bombing of the World Trade Center, was to have been the assassin in Manila, Newsday said.
Yousef reportedly told the FBI that he had planned to kill Clinton with a missile or explosives along the motorcade but abandoned the plot when he realized security would be too tight.

Load-Date: August 27, 1998


End of Document