WAR IN THE GULF: Terrorism;
Threats, Real or Not, Stir Fears Across U.S.
The New York Times
January 24, 1991, Thursday, Late Edition - Final


Copyright 1991 The New York Times Company
Distribution: National Desk
Section: Section A;; Section A; Page 14; Column 1; National Desk; Column 1;
Length: 1209 words
Byline: By ROBERT REINHOLD, Special to The New York Times

By ROBERT REINHOLD, Special to The New York Times
Dateline: LOS ANGELES, Jan. 23
Body


It certainly looked suspicious, the taped shopping bag found outside the Louis Vuitton luggage boutique on Rodeo Drive in Beverly Hills the other morning.
Sheriff's deputies rushed in and closed off the street, and the bomb squad gingerly carted the bag off to an empty canyon, where it was exploded -- with a puff of feathers. The suspected terrorist bomb turned out to be a pillow.
If Rodeo Drive, where high-price shops now cater largely to busloads of Japanese tourists, seemed an unlikely target for Iraqi terrorists, the episode underscored the jitters that have swept the country since the outbreak of war in the Persian Gulf.
And if all the scares have so far proved false alarms or hoaxes, many Americans are nonetheless wandering through a psychological twilight zone of enormous stress in which it is difficult to differentiate reality, perception and fantasy.
"People are nervous -- everyone is dealing with the issue of what is real and what is fantastic in a state of threat," said one expert, Dr. Mardi J. Horowitz, a psychiatrist who directs the Program on Conscious and Unconscious Mental Processes at the University of California at San Francisco.
 
'State of Hypervigilance'
 "People are searching for information to make the distinction," he said. "It creates a state of hypervigilance." Dr. Horowitz confessed that he was uneasy about taking a planned flight to Washington this week.
He is not alone in an American public whose fears were only heightened this week by news pictures of grim-faced captured American pilots, the deadly Iraqi missile raid against Tel Aviv on Tuesday night and terrorist attacks today on two American organizations in Istanbul and at two banks partly owned by Saudi and French investors in Lebanon.
Psychologists and psychiatrists say the fears feed largely on television images from the war zone as well as those of possible domestic targets.
Examples of the form these fears take abound:
*On an Amtrak Metroliner from Washington to New York the other morning, Melinda Lukasz, a video producer with the Bell Atlantic Corporation, was uneasy. "I thought twice about getting on this train," she said. Nearby, Phil Williams, a Washington lawyer, said he had felt in the train station at Washington "an eerie feeling of impending peril," as if "people felt they had to look over their shoulders."
*Ara Soulahian, a Federal Express courier who works in the heavily Jewish Fairfax district of Los Angeles, mused on his fate: "I realize now how I probably will die -- on the job. I'll be making a delivery, and it will blow up right in my face." He said that in the current climate some offices were not admitting him or anybody else who delivers packages for a living.
*Steven L. Kaufman, a salesman in Cerritos, Calif., canceled his regular flight to Salt Lake City on Monday. "With the hostilities," he said, "the first thing I thought of was my 14-month-old daughter at home. It was more important for me to be here than risk flying." He added that he and his wife, Christine, had bought extra bottled water on the chance that terrorists might throw poison into the aqueducts that supply the Los Angeles area.
*Bill Payne, a Hollywood screenwriter, has decided to drive from Los Angeles to Ohio on a family visit instead of taking a flight there. "I know I'm sounding silly," he said, "but I don't like flying anyway, and I know somebody's going to get blown up. So I'm trying to reduce my chances." He has also avoided seeing the new movie "Not Without My Daughter," starring Sally Field as an Iranian's American wife trying to flee Iran, because of bomb threats against theaters that show the movie. Ms. Field hired a bodyguard last week, as did many other celebrities.
 
Fears of Calamity
 Probably not since the Cuban missile crisis of October 1962 have Americans felt a keener threat of calamity on American soil, a fear reinforced by televised images of Federal agents in gas masks practicing how they would combat terrorists at the Super Bowl in Tampa, Fla., this Sunday, of armed guards closing off public access to the Birmingham Water Works in Alabama and of new security rules at airports.
According to a New York Times/ CBS News Poll of 2,135 adults taken Jan. 17 to 19, just after the war with Iraq began, 63 percent of American adults are "very concerned" about the possibility of a terrorist attack in the United States. A separate survey of 766 adults, taken about the same time by the Gallup Organization, found that only one in four Americans felt in personal danger, although the proportion was almost certainly higher in cities.
Clearly, it is easy to dismiss some of the fears as outpacing any objective reality. Flashes of lightning and thunder over Southern California, seeming to mimic the television images of antiaircraft fire over Baghdad, stirred a brief panic among some people here Monday night.
But countless rational Americans see good reason to be worried and are taking precautions, especially Jews, many of whom see themselves as special targets.
"There is a legitimate reason to be fearful," said Rabbi Martin Hier, dean of the Simon Wiesenthal Center here. "We have to take a man like Saddam Hussein, who has a track record of using every weapon he has, including terrorism, at his word. It would be very naive to dismiss it out of hand."
 
'Fear of the Unknown'
 Dr. Barbara Cadow, a psychologist on the adjunct faculty at the University of Southern California, said she had at first thought that only the extremely neurotic would be fearful of a terrorist attack. But she soon found that even the "high-functioning professionals" among her patients were turning anxious.
She said live television scenes of Israelis' putting on gas masks, placing their small children in special protective devices and retreating to sealed rooms had a powerful effect, particularly on mothers. "It was very effective in heightening anxieties," she said. "It was hard not to be affected."
Indeed, Army surplus stores in numerous American cities reported a run on gas masks and chemical warfare suits this week, and gas masks sold out completely in Marysville, Calif.
 
Diagnosis: Overreaction
 But others see in all this a vast overreaction to danger in faraway places.
"Clearly there is a possibility of some type of terrorist activity, but certainly the reaction has been exaggerated," said Dr. Manuel Tanay, a clinical professor of psychiatry at Wayne State University in Detroit.
"My office is across from the General Motors Building, and they have almost transformed it," he said. "They have guards everywhere. Let's face it: these are overreactions. Overreactions usually indicate some type of emotional process is at work, and my interpretation is that it's a displacement of the war, where there is a real danger to our young men and women, onto the domestic situation."
Whether the current state of vigilance can be maintained is doubtful, said Shlomo Breznitz, a psychologist from the University of Haifa in Israel, who is a visiting professor at the New School in New York. Even in Israel, he said, attention to uncertain threats attenuates with time and with false alarms. Indeed, he said, false alarms are part of the terrorist arsenal, inducing people to let down their guard and making later attack easier.

Graphic

 
Photos: The outbreak of war in the Persian Gulf has led to fears of strikes by terrorists in the United States. A motorcycle officer on guard near the Vietnam Veterans Memorial was part of increased security put in place recently at monuments in the Capital by the National Park Service. (Jose R. Lopez/The New York Times); Steven L. Kaufman of Cerritos, Calif., canceled an airline trip on Monday, and his wife bought extra bottled water for fear terrorists might poison water supplies. (Bart Bartholomew for The New York Times)

Load-Date: January 24, 1991


End of Document