WAR ON TERRORISM: Defiance, 'terrorism fatigue' mix today
 The Atlanta Journal-Constitution
July 4, 2002 Thursday
Home Edition


Copyright 2002 The Atlanta Journal-Constitution


Section: News;
Length: 748 words
Byline: DAN CHAPMAN
Body


Fear of terror --- and weariness from near-constant terrorism alerts --- will shadow Atlantans today as they race along Peachtree Street, parade through downtown and crane their necks skyward in Buckhead and beyond to watch fireworks.
Yet virtually everybody interviewed Wednesday vowed defiantly to carry on with their July 4th celebrations. To do otherwise, they said, would be to grant the terrorists the victory they seek --- the disruption of the American way of life on the most American of holidays.
"Some people are scared to do anything, scared to leave their homes," said Salina Joseph, who sells chocolate at Lenox Square mall. "But that's what the terrorists want."
AJC
Joseph and others, though, confess to a bit of "terrorism fatigue," the distinctly post-Sept. 11 malady which afflicts Americans who feel they've been bombarded with one report after another of potential terrorist acts which haven't materialized.
"They've been putting out these warnings since Sept. 11," said Atlantan Mike Murchison, leaving Hartsfield International Airport for a long weekend in Dallas. "It was almost like crying wolf."
The nation remains under a heightened state of alert for possible terrorist activities. Wednesday, the FBI again advised the country's 18,000 law enforcement agencies to be vigilant. The U.S. State Department reported suspicious communications between terrorist operatives overseas.
Yet federal officials didn't cite any evidence of a specific threat against a specific target.
Nonetheless, fighter jets will patrol the skies over New York, Washington and other U.S. cities as part of the government's beefed-up security for Fourth of July celebrations. The FBI's 56 field offices will step up surveillance, via human and electronic methods, of possible targets within their jurisdictions.
And the nation's 2,000-plus medium- and large-sized Independence Day events will also be more acutely scrutinized.
"The president of the United States will encourage people to gather, to celebrate, to enjoy America's independence," White House spokesman Ari Fleischer said. "The law enforcement of the United States will take care of the worrying."
Yvonne Amos, waiting for luggage at Hartsfield, appreciates the government's zealousness.
"We should be placed on high alert," the New Yorker said, "because we took so much for granted last time."
Since the Sept. 11 attacks on the World Trade Center and the Pentagon, the FBI has issued 19 warnings or advisories about possible domestic terrorist actions. Only the April 19 warning, where terrorists were said to be considering attacking banks in the Northeast, was made directly to the public. The advisories have been issued to state and local police agencies.
Yet Americans have also learned of potential attacks on shopping malls, the Statue of Liberty, the Brooklyn Bridge, synagogues and Jewish schools. Rumors also trickled out in May that terrorists might try to bring down tall apartment buildings by packing units with explosives. Al-Qaida attacks during the holy month of Ramadan and the Winter Olympics were also considered possible.
"Lots of people are now saying, 'This is repetitive. We worry and nothing happens. Who cares?' " said Joseph, a student at Georgia State University.
Rep. Saxby Chambliss, though, said an informed America is a prepared America.
"While there are no specific targets, if a threat is possible I believe the American people should be told," the Georgian Republican, who chairs the House subcommittee on terrorism and homeland security, said Wednesday. Terrorists "go after symbols like the World Trade Center, the Pentagon and, we now believe, the White House. . . . They also focus on symbolic days."
The FBI was recently, and intensively, criticized for failing to fully investigate an internal memo last summer which stated concerns that al-Qaida members might be enrolling at flight schools. So, criticism today that the FBI is over-reacting to potential threats is unfounded, supporters say.
"They're not crying wolf," said Jim Shuler, spokesman for the Georgia Homeland Security Task Force. "Let's not forget the first attack on the World Trade Center happened years ago. And just because there's been a passage of time [since Sept. 11] doesn't mean that these ideas have passed from the minds of those who want to do our country harm. So we have to keep reminding the public that this threat is still out there."
--- Staff writers Moni Basu and Don Plummer and news services contributed to this article.

Graphic

 
Photo: Visitors to Mount Rushmore National Monument pass through metal detectors on their way to visit the mountain carving Wednesday, near Keystone, S.D. / DOUG DREYER / Associated Press

Load-Date: July 4, 2002


End of Document