WAR ON TERRORISM: Lessons of disasters unwelcome, essential;
Georgia responders build on experience
 The Atlanta Journal-Constitution
May 5, 2002 Sunday,
Home Edition


Copyright 2002 The Atlanta Journal-Constitution


Section: News;
Length: 906 words
Byline: DON PLUMMER
Body


Jekyll Island --- Georgia emergency planners are getting ready for a new kind of disaster.
The people who could write the book on floods, tornados and hurricanes met here last week to add a new chapter on preparing for attacks by terrorists.
Learning from and preparing for disasters was the theme of the Georgia Emergency Management Agency's first seminar focusing on terrorism. With the Sept. 11 terrorist attacks on New York and Washington fresh on their minds, more than 700 emergency responders --- twice last year's attendance --- turned out for sessions on biological, chemical and agricultural terrorism, weapons of mass destruction and new targets of terrorists.
AJC
Unfortunately, or fortunately, state officials say, they already have some experience. Georgia planned for terrorism during the 1996 Olympics and learned about the holes in that plan when a bomb exploded at Centinnial Olympic Park in Atlanta.
Gary McConnell says he has seen more death and destruction than he cares to remember.
But the former North Georgia sheriff, appointed in 1991 by then-Gov. Zell Miller to head GEMA, says he has come to see some good in disasters.
Over the past decade, McConnell says, every one of the state's tragedies has contained lessons for emergency responders that now benefit victims of catastrophies.
"Now, don't get me wrong," McConnell said during a break in a seminar for emergency workers. "I wish every single disaster could have been avoided, but each one has taught us something that has saved lives and made us better."
The series of bombings in Atlanta that began with the fatal Olympic Park bombing, a string of killer tornados and even near misses, such as Hurricane Floyd in 1999, when thousands of residents and tourists fumed while inching along I-16, were all "valuable lessons" for dealing with terrorism, McConnell said. New lessons
But last week, McConnell's mind was on the most recent lesson --- handling 339 bodies at the Tri-State Crematory in Noble that were "stacked like cord wood" in sheds and truck beds and scattered in the woods.
"We've reached a new low when you can treat 339 bodies like so much trash," McConnell said. But then again, the 450 county, state and federal emergency workers who dealt with the bizzare case are better prepared to handle the massive casualties that might result from a terrorist attack.
"We learned a lot about dealing with mass casualties, but we also learned a lot about dealing with families of victims," he said.
"There will be other attacks," said Gov. Roy Barnes. "The only question is how prepared will we be for another attack."
Henry Siegleson, an Atlanta emergency-room doctor, said the dying would have to be allowed to die, their suffering relieved by morphine.
"We shouldn't deceive ourselves by planning for what we can't do," said Siegleson, who is helping GEMA develop a plan for dealing with attacks that could leave thousands dead, dying or wounded. "Our hospitals are already at capacity. We just can't send them hundreds, possibly thousands of extra patients."
Instead, Siegleson said the mortally injured should be made comfortable in mass hospices. Those who could recover should be transported to stadiums or gyms for initial treatment then be sent home to recuperate.
Another threat, the intentional spread of animal diseases such as anthrax and foot-and-mouth disease, would not result in massive loss of human life but could strike a fatal blow to the economy.
"Foot-and-mouth would be the weapon of choice for terrorists," University of Georgia veternarian Corrie Brown said. "It's not a question of if; it's a question of when" the disease might appear in the United States.
Foot-and-mouth, unlike anthrax, is easy to transport and poses few health risks to the perpetrators, she said.
GEMA veternarian Paul Williams said a study conducted before Sept. 11 found that the cost of dealing with a single herd of infected cattle could top $3.4 billion.
As they prepare for a wide variety of possible attacks, emergency workers also must anticipate new targets for terrorism, GEMA safety specialist Michael Dorn said.
Schools and places of worship are among what Dorn said are emerging terrorist targets.
Disgruntled students have put school shootings in the headliness, and that fact is not lost on terrorists who want maximum publicity of their attacks, said Dorn, who for 10 years was police chief for the Bibb County schools.
"Churches, synagogues and mosques are among the few places where you could attack 500 to 1,000 people at one time and the reaction would be intense," Dorn said. New money
Even with more money for first responders in the proposed federal budget, Iowa Emergency Director Ellen Gordon said it would be impossible to field, equip and train specialty teams for all varieties of potential attacks and targets.
Georgia is slated to receive $102 million of the $3.5 billion in proposed federal funds for first responders, state Public Safety Director Robert Hightower said.
Hightower, who coordinates Georgia's Homeland Security Task Force, said the state is not waiting for federal money to prepare for terrorism.
An intelligence-gathering program was started in October with existing grant money.
Several surplus military helicopters have been added to the State Patrol fleet, some equipped with infrared night-vision cameras paid for with forfeited drug money.
Local, state and federal agencies already are conducting joint anti-terrorism training.

Graphic

 
Photo:
For GEMA head Gary McConnell (far left), every tragedy has contained lessons for emergency responders that now benefit victims of catastrophes. Photo:
For GEMA head Gary McConnell, every tragedy has contained lessons for emergency responders that now benefit victims of catastrophes. / BOBBY HAVEN / Associated Press / (Metro)

Load-Date: May 5, 2002


End of Document