War and Terrorism Dominate Convention Talk
The New York Times
July 29, 2004 Thursday
Late Edition - Final


Copyright 2004 The New York Times Company
Section: Section P; Column 4; National Desk; Pg. 4; THE DEMOCRATS; THE CONVENTION IN BOSTON -- SECURITY
Length: 661 words
Byline: By DAVID JOHNSTON and MARC SANTORA
Dateline: BOSTON, July 28 
Body


The speeches on the convention floor may sound scripted and the party's message may be prepackaged, but as the bombing in Iraq on Wednesday reminded delegates here, forces beyond anyone's control could play a critical role in determining the outcome of the presidential election.
 ''Events are in the saddle and ride mankind,'' said former Senator Max Cleland, recalling Ralph Waldo Emerson's observation during the Civil War. ''Events are driving this election.'' 
  For Mr. Cleland, a Georgia Democrat who lost his seat two years ago after a bitter campaign, and other Democrats gathered here, today's suicide bombing, the deadliest in nearly a year, drove home the need for a change in the White House.
 ''It's classic guerrilla warfare,'' Mr. Cleland said. ''And the guerrillas don't lose a guerrilla war.''
 Not since Iran held American hostages during the 1980 national conventions have events outside the United States seemed to loom so large over the political landscape. The subjects of war and terrorism often dominate conversations among the delegates gathered here -- even as the metal barriers and tight security at the convention hall are physical reminders of the terrorist threat.
 In conversations in hotel lobbies and the convention floor, delegates said they worried about the political implications of an unforeseen event like a terrorist attack in the United States or the possibility that the Bush administration, trying to assure victory on Election Day, might manipulate the terror threat level or announce a plan to withdraw troops from Iraq in a fall surprise.
 The twin issues of war and terrorism pose the most immediate problem for Senator John Kerry, the Democrats' presumptive nominee, and his party, whose rank and file are deeply divided about the war and how to end it. 
 Perhaps as a result, the speakers at the convention have attacked the administration over the war, but seem to be avoiding direct criticism of Mr. Bush.
 Mr. Kerry and his running mate, Senator John Edwards of North Carolina, voted to allow the president to use military force in Iraq. But Mr. Kerry has said the president acted rashly by going to war based on faulty intelligence and with insufficient support of allies and without a clear plan for postwar occupation.
 On terrorism, Mr. Kerry has tried to find ways to distinguish himself from Mr. Bush, who has largely anchored his case for re-election on his performance since the Sept. 11 attacks. In recent days, the senator called for an extension of the national commission that investigated the attacks, which was due to expire on Aug. 26, to monitor progress on the carrying out of the panel's recommendations issued last week. 
 ''Everywhere delegates go, war is a constant theme,'' said M. Betsy Rellin, a delegate from Monroe County, N.Y. ''Everywhere you go on the streets you see police and guns and soldiers. And then there is this atrocious, horrible war in Iraq.'' 
 This is Ms. Rellin's fourth Democratic convention, and she said she had ''never been to a convention where something like this was hanging over our head.''
 But there seems to be a split in the party over what should happen next in Iraq, with some wanting to leave as soon as possible and others, like Mr. Kerry, suggesting a more measured approach that does not call for American troops coming home any time soon. 
 Mr. Kerry's position seems to open him to Republican attacks that he has not taken a firm stand on Iraq, voting for the war before voting against it, as the Republican talking point reads.
 Representative Jim McDermott, a Democrat from Seattle and critic of the war, said Mr. Kerry could easily defend himself on this charge.
 ''George Bush doesn't have any nuance,'' Mr. McDermott said. ''We have had four years of a guy who has said, 'I am going to go in there and drag them out by the hair. Bring 'em on.' That was just stupid.'' 
 Now, he said, Mr. Kerry's more studied responses are what people are looking for.           

http://www.nytimes.com

Load-Date: July 29, 2004


End of Document