War on terrorism is too soft to insure victory
University Wire
November 14, 2001


Copyright 2001 Daily Trojan via U-Wire
Section: COLUMN
Length: 833 words
Byline: By John Hoedeman, Daily Trojan
Dateline: Los Angeles
Body


America seems to have learned nothing from Vietnam. A few troops here and there, appeasement of protesters and an overall mediocre effort by the "forces of freedom" led to the debacle known as the Vietnam War. Our war veterans, who are truly heroes, fought for freedom, while a lack of impetus and an overflow of politics and propaganda in Washington fought the same war on the wrong side.
Once again, America seems to have found a way to make a mess of foreign policy, and similarly, a way to disregard the ideals of freedom, truth and morality that provide the basis for the United States of America. My generation's Vietnam is called "The War on Terrorism."
U. Southern California
I have not heard such a blatant misnomer since California called its command-market power schemes "deregulation." It seems to me, only mere months after the climax of Sept. 11, that the United States had no real intention of waging war on terrorism. This fact is no bother to President Bush, who, as long as he keeps up appearances, garners better approval ratings than even Clinton (when he was impeached, no less).
The fact that everyone loves to ignore is, quite simply, that governments that harbor, aid, abet or even condone terrorism must be eliminated swiftly and unequivocally. When gone, the Taliban and its sister regimes must be replaced with governments that allow the freedoms we take for granted in the West.
Make no mistake; this is as close to imperialism as it gets. Anti-Western, liberal hatemongers who protest war and clamor for a peace that amounts to murder will absolutely hate this idea a fact I find ironic given the relative condition of the Western world. Putting it simply, the Islamic fundamentalist countries that harbor and condone terrorists are putrid hellholes by comparison to the United States. Those who call for peace only seek to deny the blessings of freedom, self-interest and individuality to those who now suffer under these bloodthirsty regimes.
There is no question that those who call for peace when the United States' very moral fabric has been attacked are lacking proper priorities. There must be a moral code in the life of every human being, which takes absolute precedence over every action. Without a moral code, human life is aimless and wasted. Those who would trade morality for a shaky peace must question their rationale.
Unfortunately, the worst of the anti-war protesters are those who claim to be for a compassionate sort of war. In truth, compassion is wasted on these governments. The Western world brought the Middle East the technology and capital to tap into its oil, creating the absolute livelihood for most Arabs. However, the West showed compassion when Iran nationalized its oil wells in 1951. The West showed compassion when Syria, Iraq and others followed suit after seeing what Iran got away with. The West showed compassion when Arabs declared war on Israel, using religion to justify murder. The West showed compassion when it engaged in peace talks with Arafat and the rest of them, despite the fact that Arafat and other terrorists have no moral basis to negotiate with the West. I am finished with compassion. How incredibly stupid a compassionate war is, in concept and in execution. It is unbelievable that the debate over whether to postpone war for Ramadan was ever staged. Of course war should be continued over Ramadan. I would have no qualms about an escalation of war over Ramadan. The upshot of postponement would be one more month of subjugation and terror a situation that is unacceptable.
Why war has been postponed even before Ramadan, and, more importantly, before the provocation of Sept. 11. The United States had significant moral justification to eliminate the Taliban and similar Middle Eastern regimes quite some time ago. And, even now, after Sept. 11, what has the United States accomplished in Afghanistan? The greatest military in the world, with an arsenal large enough to destroy the planet, has barely made a dent in the Afghan wilderness. Bin Laden is still alive; this is testament enough. The United States has run out of excuses to stall the war and appease the protesters. It truly is time to do what is right. The United States must wipe out everything and everyone associated with the Taliban, al Qaeda and terrorism. Now.
The soft approach the United States has taken on the war against terrorism comes from a lack of firm morality on which to base judgment. In truth, one must never fail to pronounce moral judgment, especially with future crimes at stake. Failure to pronounce the proper judgment on terrorists is the same as collaboration. I do not condone terrorism. I judge it to be unambiguously wrong. I advocate its swift eradication.
It is once again time for the United States to show its belief in freedom, truth and justice. We will not put up with another Vietnam. Our politically correct government must stop tiptoeing around morality. It is time for action.
(C) 2001 Daily Trojan via U-WIRE

Load-Date: November 14, 2001


End of Document