WAR ON TERRORISM: HOMELAND SECURITY: Barr urges privacy safeguards;
Homeland security plan raises alarms
 The Atlanta Journal-Constitution
July 20, 2002 Saturday
Home Edition


Copyright 2002 The Atlanta Journal-Constitution


Section: News;
Length: 328 words
Byline: BOB DART
Body


Washington --- Civil libertarians ranging from conservative firebrand Bob Barr to the ACLU are pushing for privacy safeguards in the new Department of Homeland Security.
Concerns about the new Cabinet department's potential intrusion into the private lives of Americans were raised at a recent hearing of the House Judiciary subcommittee on commercial and administrative law, chaired by Barr, the Republican congressman from Georgia.
At the session, Barr had asked a Bush administration official what the new department would do "to ensure the privacy of personally identifiable information" that it collects on American citizens.
Cox Washington Bureau
The official, Office of Management and Budget comptroller Mark Everson, said the administration would not be averse to including a special officer within the department to protect confidentiality and weigh privacy vs. security.
Barr and the ACLU also opposed Bush's plan to start a Terrorism Information and Prevention System, known as Operation TIPS, at the Justice Department. The proposed program would enlist "millions of American workers who, in the daily course of their work, are in a unique position to see potentially unusual or suspicious activity in public places," according to a Justice Department statement.
Among these potential volunteer spies would be letter carriers, truck drivers, railroad conductors and utility workers, the Justice Department said.
The plan could "turn local cable or gas or electrical technicians into government-sanctioned peeping Toms," warned Rachel King, an ACLU lawyer.
Barr raised an alarm during an appearance on CNN.
"Why do we need to have a government pushing and pushing and pushing people and now funding a program to encourage people to snoop and to report?" he asked. "I think that's a very slippery slope."
Barr said he had sent a letter of congratulations to the Postal Service after the agency said that it would not participate in such a domestic surveillance program.

Load-Date: July 20, 2002


End of Document