WAR ON TERRORISM: CRISIS AT A GLANCE;
Latest developments at home and abroad
The Atlanta Journal-Constitution
December 4, 2001 Tuesday,
Home Edition


Copyright 2001 The Atlanta Constitution
Section: News;; Brief
Length: 553 words
Body


AFGHAN FIGHTING CONTINUES: Anti-Taliban fighters battled for control of Kandahar's airport Monday as American bombers pounded suspected hide-outs of Osama bin Laden in the rugged White Mountains near the border with Pakistan. U.S. ALERT EXTENDED: The Bush administration wants Americans to remain on a high state of alert at least through the end of the Islamic holy month of Ramadan, government officials said Monday. Ramadan's end, which can vary from country to country, will come in mid-December. FACTIONS KEEP TALKING: Afghan factions meeting in Germany pushed forward with talks on post-Taliban rule Monday after the Northern Alliance named four prominent figures it said should be considered to lead an interim administration. MORE HELP FOR DEMOCRACIES: European foreign ministers opened an anti-terrorism conference Monday with a vow to strengthen the continent's fledgling democracies. Ministers of the 55-nation Organization for Security and Cooperation in Europe said more intervention in the Balkans and the former Soviet republics was needed to stop terrorism from taking root. AMERICAN TALIBAN FIGHTERS: Three people who claim to be American citizens and who fought on the side of the Taliban are now in the custody of U.S. forces or U.S.-allied opposition forces in northern Afghanistan, senior U.S. defense officials said Monday. BORDER TIGHTENED: The United States and Canada signed agreements Monday to increase border security and coordinate immigration policies to secure the world's largest trade relationship. ANTHRAX MYSTERY SOLVED: U.S. Health and Human Services Secretary Tommy Thompson said experts have found enough evidence to label the Nov. 21 death of 94-year-old Ottilie Lundgren in Connecticut a case of cross-contamination from the mail.
AJCANTHRAX MYSTERY SOLVED? A letter addressed to a South Bronx, N.Y., business near anthrax victim Kathy Nguyen's home went through a New Jersey post office about the same time as anthrax-contaminated letters mailed to Capitol Hill. The discovery gave further credibility to the theory that the 61-year-old hospital worker was infected by cross-contaminated mail --- if only because no other explanation has come to light. SENATE BUILDING REOPENS: Employees returned to work Monday at the Dirksen Senate Office Building in Washington, closed while crews fumigated Senate Majority Leader Tom Daschle's office in the adjacent Hart Senate Office Building with chlorine dioxide gas over the weekend. The Hart building will remain shut while the Environmental Protection Agency finishes work on 11 other senators' offices. ANTHRAX DISPOSAL PROTESTED: A plan to ship anthrax-laden material from the East Coast to a hazardous waste facility in Texas has locals worried. "We already feel so saturated with pollutants. Why introduce anything else?" asked Geraldine Hunt of the Port Arthur Industry and Community Leader Advisory Group. She noted that several predominantly black communities are near the incinerator, about 80 miles east of Houston. TABLOIDS MIGHT MOVE: American Media's CEO said he might move the tabloid empire out of Florida because of lack of support from county and business leaders after his building was contaminated with anthrax. The Boca Raton company publishes six tabloids, including The National Enquirer, Globe and Weekly World News.

Load-Date: December 4, 2001


End of Document