War on terror depends on cooperation with Pakistan; With Musharraf gone, new leaders will have to be convinced to combat Islamic militants.
Portland Press Herald (Maine)
August 19, 2008 Tuesday
FINAL Edition


Copyright 2008 Blethen Maine Newspapers, Inc. All Rights Reserved
Section: EDITORIAL; Pg. A6; OUR VIEWS
Length: 294 words
Byline: --
Body


Superlatives come too easy when it comes to U.S. diplomacy. The world is so complex, and U.S. interests so far-reaching, a president and his team have a dizzying number of ''critical'' relationships to manage at any one time.
But the relationship between the United States and Pakistan ought to rank high on any diplomatic task list, and the resignation Monday of that country's leader only adds to the urgency.
Pervez Musharraf's departure has been expected for weeks, but now that it's here, it raises a difficult challenge for the United States.
There are many reasons why Musharraf's rule wore thin in Pakistan. He has not embraced democracy, to say the least. He has been heavy-handed in attempts to cling to power, including replacing judges that he feared would not rule in his favor. But Musharraf leaves amid considerable resentment that he sided with the United States in the war on global Islamic terrorism, and drew fire especially for his willingness to use Pakistani troops to combat militants.
So the considerable diplomatic task awaiting President Bush and his successor is to convince the Pakistani government to cooperate in the war on terrorism, even when such cooperation carries with it some domestic political risk for Pakistan's rulers.
This is a delicate task. It requires an emphasis on short-term benefits associated with cooperation such as direct aid, but also a hint of the long-term negative consequences associated with providing tacit support for the Taliban and other radical groups.
On the stump, both Sens. Barack Obama and John McCain appear to recognize the importance of this relationship, though finding the right balance between tough rhetoric and diplomatic tones will be a challenge, both in terms of politics and eventual policy.

Load-Date: August 19, 2008


End of Document