War on terrorism requires patience
Spokesman Review (Spokane, WA)
September 11, 2002 Wednesday Spokane Edition


Copyright 2002 Spokane Spokesman-Review
Section: THE REGION; OUR VIEW; Pg.B6; COLUMN, EDITORIAL
Length: 546 words
Byline: D.F. Oliveria/For the editorial board
Body


Often, Americans act like children. We have short memories, little patience
 and scare easily.
 A growing minority, for example, are beginning to question the success of
 the war on terrorism, although President George W.   Bush warned from the
 beginning that ''the first war of the 21st century" would be drawn out and in
 many instances covert. Without new Aghan cities to capture and Taliban and al
 Qaeda terrorists to kill or catch wholesale, Americans have turned inward.
Domestic issues now are of equal or greater concern than terrorism.
 As this country observes today's first anniversary of the cowardly attacks
 on the World Trade Center and the Pentagon, we should recommit ourselves to
 winning the war on terrorism. For the thousands in the air and on the ground
 who were murdered a year ago by suicidal extremists, we should bring to
 justice Osama bin Laden and those in hiding who helped carry out the attacks.
 For the 47 brave U.S. military personnel who have fallen in this shadow war
 and the ones who have been wounded, we must not forget.
 For our children and our children's children, we must rid the world of this
 evil, if we are ever to be free of it.
 We've come far in only a year under the capable leadership of the Bush
 administration. Consider:
 Defying history and hand-wringers who predicted a military quagmire similar
 to Vietnam, U.S.-led forces quickly drove Taliban thugs from power, leveled al
 Qaeda training grounds, chased bin Laden into the mountains, helped install a
 new government and averted a humanitarian disaster. Some credit for this
 remarkable campaign can be laid at the feet of Fairchild Air Force Base
 personnel who manned the refueling tankers that were crucial to prosecuting
 the war and providing aid.
 U.S. forces crippled bin Laden's network by killing or capturing 16 of 25
 al Qaeda leaders and 21 of 27 Taliban leaders, by killing 5,000 Taliban and
 foreign fighters and several hundred members of al Qaeda's paramilitary force,
 by detaining 600 al Qaeda and Taliban suspects and by freezing terrorist
 financial assets. A possibility remains that bin Laden might have died, too.
 Several terrorist attacks against American targets on foreign soil have
 been thwarted by information we have captured, interrogation of al Qaeda and
 Taliban captives, and our renewed commitment to intelligence gathering.
 America responded to the attacks and a bioterrorism scare in which
 anthrax-tainted letters killed five and injured 13 by upgrading homeland
 defense. Some of the unilateral actions taken in the passion immediately after
 the attacks went too far in undermining civil liberties and had to be reined
 in.
 Unabashed patriotism reappeared and America rallied around its grand old
 flag.
 Much has been done. Much more needs to be done. Only six weeks ago,
 Secretary of Defense Donald Rumsfeld reiterated the administration position on
 this semiclandestine war: ''We are closer to the beginning than the end."
 This isn't the time to pull back or to give a pass to regimes that harbor
 terrorists and export their vile craft. Nor is it a time to get so wrapped up
 in the stock market and personal financial portfolios that we forget there are
 evil men out there who are fixated on developing horrible weapons to use
 against us. They must be stopped.

Load-Date: September 14, 2002


End of Document