War on terrorism leads down a very slippery slope
University Wire
November 19, 2001


Copyright 2001 Brown Daily Herald via U-Wire
Section: COLUMN
Length: 972 words
Byline: By Chris Senio, Brown Daily Herald
Dateline: Providence, R.I.
Body


To say that we are fighting an unconventional war would be a gross understatement. No one really knows how long our present conflict will endure because no one knows what our present conflict really is. Here is what we do know:
We know we are fighting the Taliban, and we are winning. In recent days, Taliban forces have sustained heavy losses as a result of continuous American air strikes combined with a successful offensive launched by the Afghan resistance group, the Northern Alliance. Taliban control of major Afghani cities is diminishing rapidly. The Taliban control less than a third of Afghanistan, and it is quite possible that by the time we return from Thanksgiving, The Taliban will no longer have any of Afghanistan under their control.
Brown U.
We are also fighting a terrorist organization, al Qaeda, who we believe to be the sponsoring organization for the Sept. 11 attacks. In press conference after press conference President Bush, Secretary of Defense Donald Rumsfeld and countless other U.S. officials have hammered in to the American psyche that we are fighting a war against the Taliban and al Qaeda, and that we will not stop until our war is won. What would otherwise be a straightforward objective is mired, when in the same breath, our officials tell us that we are also fighting a "war on terrorism." Exactly how uses military force to fight a principle, an "ism," is never made clear. By declaring war on "terrorism," we are most certainly expanding and obfuscating our goal -- perhaps, rightly so.
In so doing, we not only fight a specific terrorist organization, and a specific government, harboring members of that organization, but we fight all of those espousing terrorist beliefs. Instead of merely fighting people who have committed acts of war against us (we definitely should), we declare war on those who support terrorist acts (fine), we declare war on those willing to join with those who support said acts (okay), we declare war on those who agree with some of the principles of terrorism (hmmm) and we declare war on people who would never think of committing acts of terrorism, but who, under circumstances beyond their control or understanding may happen to be fighting alongside Taliban forces (unfortunate). The formerly clearly delineated line between friend and foe has degenerated into a blurry mess.
I do not mean to highlight the problems inherent with fighting an ideology because I do not support the fight. I am very much in favor of our campaign in Afghanistan and would be in favor of additional campaigns in Iraq or anywhere else, if they were shown to be necessary for global security. However, it is important to be aware of the slippery nature of our conflict.
When we extend our fight beyond armies, and include civilians who we believe to be seditious, we run the very serious risk of acting against the freedoms we hold so dear. When we fight people not for acting but for thinking a certain way, our fight becomes much more difficult. Exactly who is "against us?" A person who crashes a 747 into a densely populated area, killing thousands of civilians is most certainly our enemy, but should a person who smiles upon hearing the news of that attack be condemned to die? Are people who don't directly support al Qaeda or the Taliban, but share some of their beliefs our enemy too? Should they die? Exactly what does it mean to "support" the Taliban? It should be all too clear why we are in a difficult position. The uncertainty and confusion that accompanies fighting people for thinking a certain way is only enhanced when these people change their minds.
As reported in "The New York Times" on Nov. 14, Northern Alliance troops became the unfortunate victims of such confusion. After an agreement between Taliban and Northern Alliance commanders, which stated that the Taliban would peacefully surrender the city of Kunduz, Taliban forces immediately went back on their agreement and ambushed Northern Alliance troops entering the city. It would be easy for us to look down on the naivete of the Northern Alliance troops for falling for such a trick, but in a world where mass defections are a way of life for these two forces, can we really blame the Northern Alliance? Defections occur en masse and in both directions, based largely on who happens to be winning in any given battle.
Because of American military support, the Northern Alliance has been winning, and their numbers have been growing thanks to the defected Taliban soldiers, but who's to say that these very same soldiers would not revert back to the Taliban in a second, if the outcome of the war became uncertain? And what is the Northern Alliance to do when they see Taliban soldiers wave the white flag? Can we ever be sure surrender or defection is genuine, and not merely a trick, like the one in Kunduz?
When dealing with people who would rather die for their cause than surrender, one must be extra cautious upon witnessing a "change of heart." We certainly cannot accept the surrender of the same people who are willing to crash planes and kill themselves along with thousands of Americans, and these people most certainly comprise a portion of the Taliban forces. Should the Northern Alliance then, refuse surrenders and kill everyone opposing them, to avoid further ambush? This alternative hardly seems attractive or morally acceptable. Unfortunately, there is no way to distinguish those who would rather injure America and die in the process from those who joined the Taliban forces because it was necessary for survival and are waiting to defect at just the right time.
I can think of no effective policy to deal with the unique situation we face, so all I would do is urge caution. Beware Taliban soldiers bearing gifts.
(C) 2001 Brown Daily Herald via U-WIRE

Load-Date: November 19, 2001


End of Document