WAR ON TERRORISM: CRISIS DEVELOPMENTS ;
Latest news from here and abroad
 The Atlanta Journal-Constitution
June 4, 2002 Tuesday
Home Edition


Copyright 2002 The Atlanta Journal-Constitution


Section: News;; Brief
Length: 515 words
Body


Senate debates $31 billion anti-terror bill
The Senate on Monday began debating an anti-terrorism bill with a $31 billion price tag that could balloon despite President Bush's objections that it is already too expensive.
The measure is already crammed with money for the Pentagon, intelligence, airport security and food safety, but senators from both parties were lined up with amendments, including many having nothing to do with the fight against terrorism.
These included a long-shot effort for $8.9 billion to help fiscally struggling states pay for Medicaid and other social services; a likelier $1 billion for drought-afflicted farmers; and money to combat AIDS overseas and rebuild the Oklahoma bridge that an errant barge toppled last month.
From staff and wire reports
The bill is already heftier than the $27.1 billion version that the president sent Congress in March.
The House approved a $29 billion package May 24. Senate debate is expected to last at least a week.
DeKalb agency sets up hotline
The DeKalb County Office of Homeland Security, established to help in the fight against terrorism, has set up a telephone hotline. People with information about suspicious people, packages or activities are urged to call 404-297-4572. Calls may be anonymous, and all information will be kept confidential.
Soldiers wonder where enemy is
U.S. troops swept onto a mountain ridge near the Pakistani border, ready to face perhaps dozens of al-Qaida or Taliban fighters. But they found only caves and buildings that had not been lived in for weeks. The search left soldiers who returned Monday to Bagram air base wondering if there is anyone left to fight in the field in eastern Afghanistan.
FBI chief to review wiretap rejections
Responding to criticism, the FBI has quietly changed its internal rules so that Director Robert Mueller personally reviews any requests by agents for secret terrorism wiretaps denied by lawyers at headquarters. The change gives FBI agents in the field a final avenue for appeal directly to Mueller if they believe terrorism investigations are being hampered by headquarters.
Airport screeners free to blow whistle
Transportation Department officials agreed to make it easier for the new airport passenger screeners to report security problems. The Transportation Security Administration said the 30,000 employees who will be hired to check passengers and carry-on luggage at airports will have whistle-blower protection like other federal workers. Under the whistle-blower law, a federal employee cannot be punished for coming forward with information about violations, abuses, dangers to public health or safety, or misspent funds.
'Invisible' screening of baggage sought
Checked bags should be screened for explosives as they travel from the ticket counter to the airplane, the head of the Transportation Security Administration says. John Magaw called for renovating airports to make room for the minivan-sized explosive detection machines in areas where bags now are sorted before being loaded onto planes.
--- From news services. Staff writer Mae Gentry contributed.

Load-Date: June 4, 2002


End of Document