WAR ON TERRORISM AT A GLANCE
St. Louis Post-Dispatch (Missouri)
March 10, 2002 Sunday Five Star Lift Edition


Copyright 2002 St. Louis Post-Dispatch, Inc.
Section: NEWS; Pg. A5
Length: 592 words
Byline: From News Services
Body


McLEAN, Va.
Moderate Muslims are key, Pentagon official says
Supporting moderate Muslims who abhor terrorism and extremism is a key to winning the war on terrorism, the Pentagon's No. 2 official said Saturday.
The Arab-Israeli turmoil hurts the U.S. cause, Deputy Defense Secretary Paul Wolfowitz said.
"To win that war against terrorism, we have to reach out to the hundreds of millions of Muslims who believe in tolerance and moderation," Wolfowitz told a group of news executives at the headquarters of the Gannett Co. Inc. "They are on the front lines of this struggle against terrorism. … By helping them to stand up against terrorists, we help ourselves."
WASHINGTON
Bush will outline plan for next stage of war
President George W. Bush will describe his broad strategy for the next stages of the war on terrorism on Monday, six months after the attacks on New York and Washington, suggesting that he may pursue the terrorist network of al-Qaida even inside countries that do not ask for an American presence.
Bush's speech on Monday, officials said, will have three major elements: a more detailed description of the administration's plans to keep al-Qaida from regrouping, praise for U.S. allies in the war and a further description of the danger that terrorists could team up with a small group of nations seeking to develop nuclear and biological weapons.
He will also declare, officials familiar with the speech say, that inaction will not be an option in dealing with countries assembling weapons of mass destruction, a reference to the administration's strategy in dealing with Saddam Hussein of Iraq.
PARIS
French refused to bomb some targets, paper says
France refused last week to allow its warplanes to attack some targets in Afghanistan assigned to them by U.S. commanders, arguing that the missions endangered civilians, a newspaper says.
The report in Le Monde's Sunday edition did not say how many missions the French had refused to carry out.
But it quoted responsible figures in the French military as saying French aircraft had completed around 20 missions in the Gardez region, attacking more than a dozen targets, in the last week.
France has deployed fighters from the aircraft carrier Charles de Gaulle and Mirage aircraft based in Kyrgyzstan to help the United States destroy a hardened core of al-Qaida fighters in the Gardez area, 90 miles south of Kabul.
Targets assigned to the French by the U.S. command are checked by the French command in the region, which is under instructions from President Jacques Chirac and Prime Minister Lionel Jospin.
There was no comment immediately available from either the president's or prime minister's office.
OKLAHOMA CITY
Survivors, relatives open petition drive for aid
A group of Oklahoma City bombing survivors and relatives of those killed began a petition drive Saturday asking Congress to give them the same multibillion-dollar financial aid as those harmed in the Sept. 11 attacks on New York and the Pentagon.
A group representing about 10 percent of the roughly 1,500 survivors and heirs of the truck bombing in April 1995 that killed 168 people asked visitors to the bombing memorial to sign the petition.
"There are so many victims from this that have major medical bills and will from now on," said Kathy Youngblood, co-director of the group Victims of Terrorism Information and Vital Exchange Services, which says it has about 160 members.
Youngblood, whose husband, John, died in the Alfred P. Murrah federal building, said Oklahoma City victims have been forgotten since the Sept. 11 attacks.

Load-Date: March 10, 2002


End of Document