War on terrorism featured
Deseret News (Salt Lake City)
December 7, 2001, Friday


Copyright 2001 The Deseret News Publishing Co.
Section: LIFE;
Length: 383 words
Byline: By John C. Ensslin Scripps Howard News Service
Body


Move over, Mark McGuire and Sammy Sosa. The newest collectible cards on the trading block are George Bush and Osama bin Laden.
Two Condoleezza Rices will get you a Rudolph Giuliani.
Several Denver-area sports-card shops are selling a series of 90 glossy cards devoted to the war on terrorism.
Produced by the Topps Co., the Enduring Freedom Picture Cards depict military and civilian leaders, as well as New York City police officers and firefighters.
"They've had some interest, obviously not as much as the baseball cards, but they've been fairly popular," said Brett Lehrer of Bill's Sports Collectibles in Denver.
The cards are sold in wax-wrapped sets of seven with a patriotic sticker instead of the traditional piece of gum.
People seem to appreciate that a portion of the money goes to some of the relief efforts, such as the Twin Towers fund, said Sally Farnsworth, co-owner of All C's Collectibles in Aurora, Colo.
However, it remains to be seen whether Enduring Freedom cards will have any long-term value as collectibles, Farnsworth said.
Although Topps is better known for the baseball cards it has produced for more than 50 years, this is not the first time it has turned to historic topics.
The company has published cards devoted to the Korean War, the Civil War, Operation Desert Storm and produced the Man on the Moon Cards series.
The decision to produce this latest series came shortly after the Sept. 11 terrorist attacks, said Topps CEO Arthur Shorin.
Shorin said the cards are aimed at providing children with reassuring information about the events they see unfolding on television and in the newspapers.
"They need to understand that the president and his advisers are going to keep them safe and that the bad guys will be dealt with," Shorin said.
Company officials debated over whether to include al Qaida leader bin Laden's picture in the series. But they did.
"How can he not be in it?" Storin said. "We expect many kids will use that card to act out their disdain for the guy."
He has already heard of one kid who smeared peanut butter on the bin Laden card.
The cards attracted interest from at least one nontraditional customer. Storin said Topps recently received a request from French President Jacques Chirac.
"He wanted to autograph them and send them to his friends," Storin said.

Load-Date: December 7, 2001


End of Document