WAR ON TERRORISM: DOMESTIC SECURITY: Lawmakers weigh needs in Georgia
The Atlanta Journal-Constitution
December 12, 2001 Wednesday,
Home Edition


Copyright 2001 The Atlanta Constitution
Section: News;
Length: 495 words
Byline: MAURICE TAMMAN
Body


As they prepare homeland defense plans, Georgia lawmakers were warned by experts Tuesday that the war on terrorism may never be completely won and that old concepts of privacy and civil liberties may be challenged in the process.
Robbie Friedmann, head of Georgia State University's department of criminal justice, said the nation's need to defend against terrorism is "going to last for a very long time."
"If they did Sept. 11, why would they stop at that? That should be a working assumption," he told the combined meeting of the Senate Public Safety and Science and Technology committees.
AJC
Foreign security experts provided a taste of life with terrorism.
In Britain, which has been battling the Irish Republican Army for decades, citizens have become used to the thousands of surveillance cameras that monitor motorists' and pedestrians' move around the country, said Jim King, a security expert with the British Embassy in Washington.
Britons accept the intrusion of the cameras because they also are routinely used to thwart crime and monitor for terrorists. "It's part and parcel of everyday life," King said.
Israeli Maj. Gen. David Tsur, chief of staff for the minister of public security, told the legislators there will be limits to how much governments can do to prevent attacks, especially in free societies.
"All of the democratic governments are thinking what to do, but also, maybe, what not to," Tsur said.
He noted that many have criticized Israel for "targeted killing" of suspected terrorist leaders, something that might be hard for Americans to accept.
"We call it intercepting the terrorists on the way to an attack," he said.
Both Tsur and King urged the need for cooperation and communication among all law enforcement agencies.
Lt. Gov. Mark Taylor, who chaired the hearing, said he expects the Legislature to consider laws to tighten the use and manufacture of materials that could be used to build conventional, biological or chemical weapons. He also said there would be some discussion about a state-issued security card.
The hearing was an initial step to gather information on what issues lawmakers need to address in the session that begins Jan. 14.
Taylor said he plans to take another step Friday when he begins talks with representatives of metro Atlanta hospitals and other emergency care providers on establishing a statewide trauma network that would allow the state to know instantly which hospitals had room to handle injuries.
Taylor also said he sees a role for the state in helping its cities bear the costs of increased security, but he offered no specifics.
Also Tuesday, state Republicans revealed their agenda for terrorism-related reforms. State Sen. Eric Johnson (R-Savannah) issued a proposal to create the crime of domestic terrorism and to make it punishable by the death penalty or life in prison without parole. The act would also allow investigators to get one warrant to monitor telephone, mobile and Internet communications.

Load-Date: December 12, 2001


End of Document