War against terrorism a well-planned success
Deseret News (Salt Lake City)
November 25, 2001, Sunday


Copyright 2001 The Deseret News Publishing Co.
Section: VIEWPOINT;
Length: 766 words
Byline: By Dan K. Thomasson Scripps Howard News Service
Body


WASHINGTON -- Well, so much for those who have spent many days telling us that the bombing of Afghanistan was only producing a stronger Taliban as Muslims the world over flocked to their banner. We were, they tried to convince us, only bombing rocks and impregnable positions and ultimately would have to commit huge numbers of our own troops to bloody engagements if we were to succeed.
While it may be still too early to claim a major victory in the battle against terrorism, it won't hurt to chide a little those Americans who always seem to want to regard this country and its motives in the worst light. These are, after all, the same people who would accept in a heartbeat the unverified claims of civilian deaths reported by Hanoi during Vietnam but wouldn't think of doing the same for their own authorities.
Their justifications for recent assertions of a "strengthened Taliban" were based on the Russian experience of two decades ago, reinforced by the blustery propaganda of supporters of terrorism around the world. For Osama bin Laden and his followers, Sept. 11 may have produced a euphoria felt by most of the Japanese military after Pearl Harbor. If so, it was just as short-lived.
The reality, of course, is something quite different. The American technology is far superior to that employed by the Russians. That fact should have been evident from the start considering what happened to Iraq using Soviet equipment during the Gulf War. In fact, the world has never seen more accurate, devastating ordinance than that falling from the skies over Afghanistan. The daisy cutters and sticks of penetrating, laser-guided bombs can take out anything except the most hardened, reinforced sites. As one British journalist who is a veteran of conflicts in that area noted to several of us last week: "I've been in some bombings, but these people had no idea what they were facing and the relentlessness of it, day after day, must have been horrific."
It clearly was as thousands of Taliban fighters finally got a dose of their own terror and fled south where they found just about the same. The Northern Alliance, an ill-equipped, undermanned coalition of warlord-controlled factions, was able to overrun the crumbling Taliban positions with little loss of life on the heels of these American air raids.
Throughout the weeks of criticism of the bombing strategy, military experts maintained a steadfast optimism that this was paying off even while cautioning that the war likely was to be a long one. Heading the list of those most certain about the way things were going was Secretary of Defense Donald Rumsfeld, whose strong presence and straight-forwardness has been unmatched by any predecessor in recent memory.
Even those who have been the most critical of the Bush administration have only good things to say about Rumsfeld. As a veteran journalist of more than four decades, I personally have never seen anyone in that or any other position of public power deal with the press in such an effective manner. He has been refreshingly candid and devoid of dissembling. When a top military official hemmed and hawed during a press conference about why we were employing a certain weapon, he interrupted to say it was because we were trying to kill the enemy.
If there was a serious flaw in the American strategy, it has been the reported concern of our central command over the possibility of civilian deaths. This apparently has caused us to miss opportunities to destroy some of the leaders of the Taliban but also of al Qaida, although we apparently did manage to eliminate Osama bin Laden's first lieutenant with a well-placed bomb. Collateral damage under the circumstances is hard to avoid and we should do everything reasonable to prevent it. But saving American lives should be our first priority and that comes about by doing whatever is necessary to eliminate terrorists and their backers.
This is a different approach to war, make no mistake. We are not using large land armies, which must occupy and hold territory. Our forces on the ground are highly mobile commandos who are as illusive as those they are seeking. They are not only quick-hit, search, destroy and get-out troops. They are also the modern version of forward observers who pinpoint the targets for the air forces.
Our hope is that they can find bin Laden and his clones and eliminate the terrorist networks that threaten not only us but all of civilization. It would be a mistake to underestimate our ability to do so, just as it would be a mistake to underestimate bin Laden's ability to kill more innocent people.

Load-Date: November 25, 2001


End of Document