WAR ON TERRORISM: Cleland has tough questions about war;
Georgian, Rumsfeld spar during hearing
 The Atlanta Journal-Constitution
August 1, 2002 Thursday
Home Edition


Copyright 2002 The Atlanta Journal-Constitution


Section: News;
Length: 552 words
Byline: BOB DART
Body


Washington --- Sen. Max Cleland (D-Ga.) grilled Defense Secretary Donald Rumsfeld on Wednesday about progress in Afghanistan in the war on terrorism.
Cleland interrupted the Defense Department's glowing assessment with a series of pointed questions that drew heated responses during a hearing of the Senate Armed Services Committee.
"For me, Operation Enduring Freedom has become Operation Enduring Frustration," Cleland said. "I think it's fine to nation-build or liberate Afghanistan. But for me, the frustration continues because we still haven't killed or captured Osama bin Laden and his terrorist cadre."
Cox Washington Bureau
Cleland, running in the fall for a second six-year term, is an Army veteran who lost both legs and his right arm in a grenade explosion in Vietnam.
"Do you happen to know where he is?" Cleland asked, referring to bin Laden.
"The answer is, obviously, the United States of America does not know where he is," Rumsfeld replied. "We do not know if he's dead or alive. We do know that he is having a great deal of difficulty functioning. . . .
"The task is not a manhunt for Osama bin Laden, as your question suggests," Rumsfeld continued. "The task is to find the terrorists wherever they are --- that one, plus all the others --- and deal with them and deal with the countries that are providing safe haven to them."
"If we don't know where he is, how can we go after him?" Cleland asked. "Isn't he in western Pakistan, basically in a sanctuary there, in an area of Pakistan where even the Pakistani troops are basically not welcome? And aren't we vulnerable, then, to another attack or his continued organization of attacks against us?
"It troubles me, and I'm frustrated that his end is not in sight or is the end of his terrorist cadre in sight?" Cleland said. "That, for me, is mission No. 1 for our government and mission No. 1 for our military."
"I'd love to have a chance to answer those questions," a combative Rumsfeld said, leaning toward his microphone at the witness table.
He called reports that bin Laden is in western Pakistan "pure press speculation."
"You can be frustrated if you want. I'm not," he told Cleland. "Mission No. 1, you said, ought to be the al-Qaida and the Taliban. That is exactly what we're doing, and we're doing it all across the globe.
"It seems to me that the United States armed forces were designed to deal with armies, navies and air forces. Doing a single manhunt is a different type of thing," Rumsfeld said. "The intelligence community's working hard on it."
Earlier, Rumsfeld and Army Gen. Tommy Franks, commander of the U.S. forces in Afghanistan, reported on progress made in the war on terrorism declared by President Bush after the Sept. 11 attacks.
"What a difference a year makes," Rumsfeld said. "The Taliban [has] been driven from power. Al-Qaida is on the run. Afghanistan is no longer a base of global terrorist operations or a breeding ground for radical Islamic militancy."
But the defense secretary cautioned that the war is far from won and warned that it is "still closer to the beginning than to the end."
"The war on terrorism began in Afghanistan, to be sure, but it will not end there," Rumsfeld said. "It will not end until those developing nuclear, chemical and biological weapons end their threat to innocent men, women and children."

Graphic

 
Photo: Defense Secretary Donald Rumsfeld points jokingly at Army Gen. Tommy Franks (right) as they talked with Sen. John Warner (R-Va.) before Wednesday's Senate Armed Services Committee hearing. / DENNIS COOK / Associated Press

Load-Date: August 1, 2002


End of Document