War vs. Terrorism Debate In Embassy Bomb Appeal
The New York Times
December 11, 2007 Tuesday
Late Edition - Final


Copyright 2007 The New York Times Company
Section: Section B; Column 0; Metropolitan Desk; Pg. 3
Length: 682 words
Byline: By BENJAMIN WEISER
Body


The national debate over Guantanamo and the way the government has pursued its fight against terrorism since the 9/11 attacks was a presence yesterday as a federal appeals court in Manhattan considered the cases of three operatives of Al Qaeda convicted in the last major terrorism trial in the United States before 9/11.
  The three terrorists were convicted in a trial that stemmed from the bombings of two American embassies in East Africa in 1998, which killed 224 people and wounded thousands. The trial and two successive death penalty hearings ended in the summer of 2001, just before the attacks.
  Two of the men, Mohamed Rashed Daoud al-'Owhali and Mohammed Saddiq Odeh, were convicted of having involvement in the embassy bombings. A third, Wadih El-Hage, a former close aide to Osama bin Laden, was not tied to the embassy attacks. But prosecutors proved that he was a member of Mr. bin Laden's global conspiracy to kill Americans wherever they could be found.
  It was that case, Mr. El-Hage's conviction for conspiracy to kill Americans, that seemed to provoke the most questions from Judge Jon O. Newman, a member of the three-judge panel hearing the case for the United States Court of Appeals for the Second Circuit.
  At one point, Judge Newman asked a prosecutor why, if there was evidence only that Mr. El-Hage joined a conspiracy to, in effect, wage war against the United States, ''is he any different than any German soldier in World War II who joined what could be called a conspiracy to kill Americans?''
  ''Because this was a terrorist conspiracy, your honor,'' Leslie C. Brown, an assistant United States attorney, replied.
  ''When does a war become an act of terrorism?'' Judge Newman responded.
  His and other comments during the hearing echoed the debate that has raged since Sept. 11, 2001, over whether in the fight against terrorism, the correct metaphor is war or crime. Another question is whether the best response is using military justice, which can mean detaining terrorists indefinitely as enemy combatants, or charging them under criminal statutes, which affords defendants a range of rights.
  Aside from the issue of military versus civilian justice, yesterday's arguments also touched on other novel legal questions that arose in the trial, like whether foreign suspects in custody who are interrogated abroad by American law enforcement officials are entitled to the same Fifth Amendment right against self-incrimination as suspects who are questioned in the United States.
  ''The problem with the case,'' one defense lawyer, Frederick H. Cohn, told the panel, ''is that what drove this case was national security and not the criminal process.''
  Mr. Cohn's client, Mr. al-'Owhali, was convicted of murder for his role in the Kenya bombing. The trial judge, Leonard B. Sand, held that Miranda warnings should be given in such overseas interrogations, and said that Mr. al-'Owhali's confession could be used against him after finding that he had knowingly waived his rights. 
  Mr. Cohn has argued that his client was not properly advised of his rights, and should not have been interrogated without a lawyer for 14 days in Kenya.
  If foreign law allowed for waterboarding, Mr. Cohn asked yesterday, ''would we accept that? We would not.'' Therefore, he argued, Kenyan law, which allowed for lengthy detentions without a lawyer, should not necessarily be deferred to either.
  But, Judge Jose A. Cabranes interjected, ''It doesn't shock the conscience, does it, the provision of Kenyan law? I mean, we have so-called mature democracies in Western Europe which have provisions for holding defendants in circumstances analogous to this, as terror investigations.''
  He added, ''There is nothing about those systems, whether it's Britain, France or Kenya, which we would regard as shocking the conscience.''
  The panel, which also included Judge Wilfred Feinberg, also heard arguments on behalf of Mr. Odeh. It did not indicate when it would issue a ruling. A fourth defendant, Khalfan Khamis Mohamed, did not appeal. All four men are now serving life sentences.

http://www.nytimes.com

Graphic

 
From left, Wadih El-Hage, Mohamed Rashed Daoud al-'Owhali and Mohammed Saddiq Odeh, who are members of Al Qaeda.                                                                      

Load-Date: December 11, 2007


End of Document