WAR ON TERRORISM: Ashcroft: Critics help the enemy
The Atlanta Journal-Constitution
December 7, 2001 Friday,
Home Edition


Copyright 2001 The Atlanta Constitution
Section: News;
Length: 837 words
Byline: REBECCA CARR
Body


Washington --- A defiant Attorney General John Ashcroft defended himself Thursday against mounting criticism of his handling of the terrorism investigation.
Ashcroft told members of the Senate Judiciary Committee that critics of his broadened powers to investigate the Sept. 11 terrorist attacks actually are helping the enemy.
Civil liberties groups are concerned that the Justice Department is detaining more than 550 people without revealing their identities, interviewing 5,000 visitors from Middle Eastern countries, planning to use military tribunals to try terrorists, and eavesdropping on telephone calls between attorneys and clients.
"To those who scare peace-loving people with phantoms of lost liberty, my message is this: Your tactics only aid terrorists," Ashcroft said. "They give ammunition to America's enemies and pause to America's friends."
Cox Washington Bureau'Unlawful combatants'
The criticism erodes national unity and empowers Osama bin Laden, the chief suspect in the terrorist attacks and the leader of the al-Qaida terror network, the attorney general said.
Waving an al-Qaida training manual in the air, Ashcroft said investigators needed every tool possible to combat the terrorist initiatives detailed in the book. And every tool means being able to hold people on immigration charges in connection with the terrorist attacks on the World Trade Center and the Pentagon, he said.
The military tribunals are needed because terrorists are "unlawful combatants" and do not deserve the same rights as defendants before a civilian court.
"Are we supposed to read them the Miranda rights, hire a flamboyant defense lawyer, bring them back to the United States to create a new cable network of Osama TV or what-have-you, provide a worldwide platform from which propaganda can be developed?" Ashcroft asked.
Democratic senators used the manual to question Ashcroft about why he is refusing to permit the FBI to look at Justice Department records to see whether any of the 1,200 people detained since the Sept. 11 attacks had purchased guns.
The manual has a section informing al-Qaida members about the ease of buying guns in the United States and suggesting that they buy guns and practice shooting in remote areas.
Ashcroft said the law creating the system of background checks does not permit FBI investigators to use the records to investigate individuals. He said he was just enforcing the law.
But Sen. Richard Durbin (D-Ill.) asked why Ashcroft did not ask for permission to use the gun records, given the broad investigative powers he sought in the anti-terrorism legislation passed in record speed by Congress after the attacks.
"Why is it, when it gets to the Second Amendment, when it gets to this question of purchasing firearms, particularly by illegal immigrants who are here in the United States, who have connections with terrorism, that there's such a blind eye from the Department of Justice?" Durbin asked.
Ashcroft said illegal aliens should not be allowed to buy guns. He said he would be pleased to consider legislation that would "enhance our security by making it clear that they're not to be armed."
 
Friends and foes
Ashcroft is a strong proponent of gun rights issues. As a senator, he opposed permitting the government to do background checks on prospective gun buyers.
In 1998, Ashcroft voted for an amendment to the Brady gun-control law that would have instantly destroyed the background records after the buyer was cleared. The law calls for the records to be destroyed after 90 days.
Throughout the four-hour hearing, Sen. Orrin Hatch (R-Utah) defended the attorney general and the administration.
At one point, Hatch extensively quoted Sen. Zell Miller (D-Ga.), who has called the attorney general's critics "nitpickers."
The Judiciary Committee hearings have shown that the weight of legal authority "confirms the constitutionality of military tribunals," Hatch said.
And the hearings have concluded that the detainees are being treated fairly and within the bounds of the law, he said.
Sen. Russell Feingold (D-Wis.) pressed Ashcroft on why he will not release the names of the detainees.
For weeks, Ashcroft has suggested that immigration law prevented him from disclosing the names of the people being detained on immigration violations.
Under Feingold's questioning, however, Ashcroft said releasing the names varies by individual case.
Feingold took that answer to mean that there is "no blanket prohibition in the law of disclosure" to prevent making the names of the detainees public.
Ashcroft said, "I can agree with the senator, and would stipulate to the fact that there is no blanket prohibition."
The attorney general said it would unfairly taint the reputation of the detainees to make their names public, and he said he is concerned that it would help bin Laden.
Outside the hearing room, Feingold said he resented Ashcroft's suggestion that his critics were eroding national unity.
"The notion that we should get off his back is absurd," Feingold said. "He knows better than that."

Graphic

 
Photo:
Attorney General John Ashcroft shows senators a captured al-Qaida training manual Thursday. / DENNIS COOK / Associated Press

Load-Date: December 7, 2001


End of Document