WAR ON TERRORISM DISTRACTS US FROM TOUGHER ISSUES
St. Louis Post-Dispatch (Missouri)
January 6, 2004 Tuesday Five Star Late Lift Edition


Copyright 2004 St. Louis Post-Dispatch, Inc.
Section: EDITORIAL; Pg. B7; COMMENTARY
Length: 743 words
Byline: Gwynne Dyer
Body


GLOBAL AFFAIRS
History normally runs on rails, with one development following another in fairly obvious succession. It may seem like a roller-coaster ride at times, but 20 years later the outcome is just about what you would have expected at the start.
Once in a while, however, history goes right off the rails, and this may be one of those times. We'll probably know for certain by the end of this year.
Two years ago, we were being told that Sept. 11, 2001, had changed everything, but that was just media hype. In reality, 9-11 changed nothing except Americans' mistaken belief that they were invulnerable to foreign threats. Americans are still largely invulnerable to foreign threats, but a tiny chink labeled "terrorism" has opened up in their armor, and both the U.S. government and the Islamist terrorists who planned 9-11 are working overtime to make that the central issue in global affairs.
They are pursuing their own private agendas, of course, but the combination of huge American power and extreme Islamist violence has persuaded far too many people that the "war on terror" is what global politics really is about in the early 21st century.
The "war on terror" is a huge distraction from the real priorities that face the world. The human population of this planet has tripled in the past 60 years. Even if it never doubles again, it puts enormous pressure on both resources and the environment. The pressure is mounting even faster because many of those who have been poor (including most Asians) are rapidly industrializing and raising their consumption levels. Meanwhile, those who are left out of the prosperity, particularly in Africa and the Middle East, become ever more desperate and resentful.
The tightly interconnected wealth-producing machine that is the g lobalized economy is tremendously vulnerable to environmental catastrophes, political shocks or even financial mismanagement. There is a full agenda that needs our undivided attention if we are to get through the next half-century without a really big blowup.
Until recently, things were looking pretty hopeful: The Cold War ended and the great powers began to cooperate. Democracy spread around the world by nonviolent means, and with the help of globalized mass media something that you could call world public opinion began to emerge. Complex multilateral deals were made on difficult issues like trade and climate change.
During the 1990s, the way the world worked was changing fast enough that we seemed to have a chance of making it through the first half of the 21st century without a big smash and a massive die-back of the human population. Bad things happened in small, out-of-the way places like Bosnia and Rwanda, but the broad trend was reassuring. It still is, but broad trends have been dislocated by relatively local events in the past:
* China was not doomed to go into centuries of isolation and stagnation in the early 15th century just as it was poised to dominate the planet. If the emperor Zhu Di's favorite concubine had not been killed by the ligh tning strike that burned down the Forbidden City in 1421, things would have been different.
* Europe didn't have to throw away a century of relative peace and rapidly rising prosperity in the needless cataclysm of World War I. If Gavrilo Princip had gone home after failing to assassinate the Archduke Franz Ferdinand on his first try in Sarajevo in 1914, things would have been different.
Today, a small band of Islamist fanatics is trying to provoke a global confrontation between the West and Islam as a way of leveraging themselves into power in Muslim countries. And a U.S. administration dominated by neoconservative ideologues is using this threat to justify their own project for global American hegemony through military power. Neither is likely to succeed, but between them they could wreck both the institutions and the spirit of multilateral cooperation that were going to ease our way through the real crises that are coming.
By this time next year, we will know whether the Bush administration's adventure in Iraq has succeeded or failed and whether Mr. Bush himself has been re-elected or defeated. Without the neoconservatives in Washington to inflate their importance, the Islamist terrorists would dwindle to a minor policy problem and normal service would be resumed on all the important global issues. Decisive years are generally something you would prefer to avoid, but this is going to be one.

Notes

COMMENTARY: A FORUM FOR OTHER VOICES, IDEAS AND OPINIONS/ Gwynne Dyer is a London-based independent journalist.

Load-Date: January 6, 2004


End of Document