War on terrorism a dangerous dance
University Wire
December 5, 2001


Copyright 2001 Oklahoma Daily via U-Wire
Section: COLUMN
Length: 700 words
Byline: By Phillip Dow, Oklahoma Daily
Dateline: Norman, Okla.
Body


Dance? Why, I'd love to. But…
But? But George Walker Bush has taken a crap on the world and left John Ashcroft to clean up his messy underside with only the Constitution to use as toilet paper. Why is the attorney general wiping our beloved president's anus? Heh, silly. Because he is evil.
Make sense? Absolutely not -- many things don't. Right now, the American government is murdering human beings in her own people's name, discriminating against Middle Eastern men, dirtying up the Constitution by way of military tribunals, expanded FBI powers and nullified attorney-client privileges and preparing to make war on another country despite the reservations of pretty much every nation in the world. Most Americans don't care. And never mind that Congress hasn't even declared war. To me, that makes less sense than those few first sentences.
U. Oklahoma
Oh yeah, how about this? Bush wants Saddam Hussein to allow U.N. inspectors into his country to check for weapons of mass destruction that might be used by terrorists. If Hussein continues to refuse, America might support an effort to overthrow the Iraqi government. OK, so if a country makes weapons that can be used by terrorists then the government must be overthrown. Wait! Wasn't the anthrax mailed in the United States made by the U.S. military? Bush must overthrow the American government then! Or bomb Canada.
Nope. Still not making sense. Well, I'm making sense. But most of you sure aren't. Oh, one more thing. Jesus supports the war on terrorism. Which is why it is OK to be a Christian and still support the war on terrorism. Or any war for that matter. Love. Hate. Everybody's confused. Dance? Why, yes! Let us dance! Let us float even! Aren't we float-dancing already? No, but one day …
So why don't most Americans care? Probably because most Americans are designed not to care. Many of us are living manufactured lives and wallowing in filth -- manufactured culture, that is. And the designers (whoever, whatever, wherever, whenever) took special care to make sure that most of us didn't care once we were through the assembly process.
Come on, you know what I'm talking about. School and television brainwash us, church convinces us that this life doesn't even matter, society largely tells us to buy things and make a lot of money. Seriously, what do I need? What do I care about? What have I been told to care about? MTV, Starcraft and Creed! Valium and beer every once in a while are nice too. I've got a PS2. I've lost my virginity. I'm going to make $ 60,000 a year. I'm going to marry, divorce and thoroughly mess up my children. I'm going to retire. And the whole time I'm going to believe, although do little that She tells me to do, in the Christian God just to be safe.
Screw thinking for myself! Screw American history (Constitution-shmonstitution)! Screw the world! I don't care about any of that stuff! I don't know anything about it, either! Although I do enjoy pretending that I do. End result: Whatever wants to happen can happen as long as I still have my job. Unless an event effects me directly …
The American government is creating problems that will return, strengthened, to kill thousands of Americans in 10 years? I don't care. Well, good for I! Good for most of I's anyway. Well, that's the theory at least. Things happen and Americans don't care because Americans are designed not to care. Or maybe most Americans don't care because they are just monkeys in fashionable clothes.
Look. Well, Wait. What am I (as in I) thinking? I can say everything that I want to say. I can say it as loudly and outrageously as I want to. I can say it in a scholarly fashion. I can say it using reasoned arguments and support it with evidence. I can piss you off while saying it. I can put a smile on you while saying it. I can say it until I'm blue in the elbow (face, but cliches ...). And you know what? Yeah, you do. It won't matter. Because you and I, we're set in our ways. I'm not going to change a single one of you. Only you can do that. So, some advice. Think about life. Really think about life. And not just your own. I mean life.
Dance? Onwards!
(C) 2001 Oklahoma Daily via U-WIRE

Load-Date: December 5, 2001


End of Document