WAR ON TERRORISM: FBI chief: U.S. Muslims aid war on terrorism;
Help with translations important
 The Atlanta Journal-Constitution
June 29, 2002 Saturday
Home Edition


Copyright 2002 The Atlanta Journal-Constitution


Section: News;
Length: 615 words
Byline: EUNICE MOSCOSO
Body


Alexandria, Va. --- U.S. Muslims have made significant contributions to the war on terror, from teaching investigators about Islam to serving as language translators, FBI Director Robert Mueller said Friday.
"The active work of many in the American Muslim community in cities nationwide has earned public thanks and praise," Mueller said. "In some cases, even Arab-American newspapers have been extremely helpful."
Cox Washington Bureau
Mueller made the comments in an address to the American Muslim Council. His presence at the group's annual convention upset some conservatives and Jews, who said that members of the AMC have expressed support for terrorist groups and Islamic charities with alleged terrorist ties.
During the luncheon address, the FBI director was interrupted briefly by two men who stood in front of the podium holding white pieces of paper that read: "Shame on Mueller" and "The FBI Should Protect Americans from Terror."
The men were escorted out of the room, and Mueller continued his 30-minute speech, delivered in a hotel banquet room just outside Washington.
Faiz Rehman, spokesman for the American Muslim Council, said that the protesters were from a Jewish group and were allowed to attend the luncheon "in the spirit of a free America."
Mueller spoke of the controversy at the end of his speech.
"Unfortunately, persons associated with this organization have in the past made statements that indicate support for terrorism and for terrorist organizations," he said.
"I think we can --- Muslims and non-Muslims alike --- justifiably be outraged by such statements."
While the rounds of applause cooled a bit after that statement, the crowd of about 150 still gave Mueller a warm reception.
Cooperation was key
The FBI director told the group that cooperation between law enforcement and Muslim communities throughout the nation has been key to the terrorism investigation since Sept. 11.
The FBI instructed its 56 field offices to reach out to Muslim communities, who were suffering a backlash of anger after the acts of terror in New York, Pennsylvania and at the Pentagon.
Since then, agents have had more than 500 gatherings with Muslim groups and 6,000 contacts with individuals, Mueller said.
"They write back with story after story of productive meetings, insights, generosity and subsequent assistance," the FBI director said.
In addition, he said, Muslims showed an "extraordinary" response to a government request last fall for Arabic and Farsi language experts.
"Within hours, our switchboard was overwhelmed with calls, and those who came forward included doctors, lawyers, engineers, academics --- Muslim and Arab-Americans from all walks of life who were willing to quit their jobs [and] come and work for the FBI," he said.
"Already, these language experts have made important contributions."
Mueller did not answer specific written questions from the audience.
He did comment on the AMC's concerns about new government powers to search people, monitor them or detain them without charges.
Mueller asserted that law enforcement officials do not act without reason and that the broader surveillance powers will not change anything.
Some groups, including the Center for Security Policy, a conservative think tank, and the American Jewish Committee, have blasted Mueller for appearing before the AMC, whose founder, Abdurahman Alamoudi, expressed support in a 2000 speech for the Hamas and Hezbollah militant groups in the Middle East.
The United States has deemed both to be terrorist organizations.
In addition, critics note that the AMC supports the Holy Land and Global Relief foundations, even though both are suspected by the United States of raising money for terrorists.

Graphic

 
Photo: Two men said to be from a Jewish group protest a speech by FBI Director Robert Mueller to the American Muslim Council in Alexandria, Va., Friday. They were escorted out and Mueller continued his talk. / SUSANA RAAB / The New York Times

Load-Date: June 29, 2002


End of Document