WAR ON TERROR; Metro companies wary of work with 'rogue states'
The Atlanta Journal-Constitution
February 5, 2012 Sunday
Main Edition


Copyright 2012 The Atlanta Journal-Constitution


Section: BUSINESS; Pg. 1D
Length: 825 words
Byline: Kelly Yamanouchi

Staff
Highlight: Filings provide feds and investors more details on global connections.
Body


Companies with international reach --- including some in Atlanta --- have drawn the attention of an obscure government office that pushes them to detail their dealings in nations considered state sponsors of terrorism.
It's driven in part by the rise of "terror-free investing," or avoiding investments in companies that have business activities in state sponsors of terrorism --- currently designated by the State Department as Cuba, Iran, Sudan and Syria. Some large institutional investors such as state retirement funds and universities have been pushed by lawmakers or officials to divest shares in companies that do business in certain nations.
And since 2004, the U.S. Securities and Exchange Commission's little-known Office of Global Security Risk has routinely asked certain multinational firms to respond to questions about any business in so-called "rogue states."
Companies are queried not necessarily because they have broken any laws, but to increase the information available through SEC filings for investors who may want to know.
U.S. investors "may certainly want to be told they are investing in those companies," said Amy Deen Westbrook, an associate professor at the Washburn University School of Law who has studied companies' global security risk disclosures.
In one example of disclosure, Coca-Cola in 2006 said in a filing that it doesn't authorize any sales of its beverages into Cuba or North Korea. But it added some of its products "may be available in hotels for foreign tourists or in foreign currency stores in Cuba and North Korea," after agencies of those governments, such as import-export companies, bought the products from wholesalers in third countries.
"We do not have the contractual or practical means to prevent these types of activities," Coke wrote in the filing. North Korea has since been removed from the list of state sponsors of terrorism.
Delta Air Lines, answering an SEC query last fall, disclosed that it sold tickets for flights by foreign partners into Syria until President Barack Obama signed an executive order last year prohibiting transactions with the Syrian government, and that it had an interline agreement with Iran Air until that carrier was added to a list of sanctioned companies last year.
Such activities "are much smaller and really on a different scale and intention of others" that have been investigated for inappropriate dealings, such as investigations into a Halliburton foreign subsidiary's past operations in Iran, Westbrook said.
In a response to queries about operations in Cuba, Iran, Sudan and Syria, Delta also reported that some independent agents sold interline tickets to or from Cuba under the code of Delta or its merger partner Northwest, in violation of Delta's policy, which brought Delta a small amount of revenue in past years.
Revenue associated with those countries that Delta received from its joint venture with Air France/KLM totaled nearly $5 million in 2011 in Iran; more than $900,000 in Sudan; and about $800,000 in Syria. And Delta paid $1.3 million to Cuba, nearly $800,000 to Iran and about $11,500 to Syria in 2011 to operate flights through their airspace.
The airline's total revenue in 2011 was $35 billion.
"This is from our perspective a very routine disclosure," said Delta spokesman Trebor Banstetter. "We're used to getting these types of questions on all sorts of issues related to foreign countries, because operating a global airline can be a very complex thing to run."
Sandy Springs-based UPS responded to a 2011 query about two Chinese freight forwarders that state on their websites that they provide UPS services from China to Iran and use the UPS logo, saying neither company has any business arrangement with UPS, and that UPS has demanded that they remove the logo from their websites. One complied with a cease-and-desist letter and the other did not.
UPS said it has no subsidiaries, offices, facilities, employees or assets in Cuba, Iran, Sudan or Syria, and its revenue from activities in those countries totaled less than 0.005 percent of total revenue from 2008 through 2010. For example, the company also disclosed that it permits package delivery and freight services to and from Syria to the extent that they comply with U.S. law, through contractor relationships with private companies.
Sandy Springs-based First Data said in a filing last year in response to questions about Syria and Cuba that it does not have any operations, offices, assets, liabilities, employees or customers in those countries, but it is possible that a debit or credit card issued by a bank First Data processes for could be used in Syria or Cuba.
Duluth-based farm machinery maker AGCO said in a 2009 filing that its sales to Iran, Syria and Sudan totaled about $11 million in 2008, making up less than 0.2 percent of total sales.
Delta, Coke, UPS, First Data and AGCO each noted that they do not think their disclosures will raise concern among investors.

Load-Date: February 5, 2012


End of Document