WAR ON TERRORISM: Feds: Charity lied on terror;
Leader accused of aiding al-Qaida
 The Atlanta Journal-Constitution
May 1, 2002 Wednesday,
Home Edition


Copyright 2002 The Atlanta Journal-Constitution


Section: News;
Length: 597 words
Byline: REBECCA CARR
Body


Washington --- The head of one of the nation's largest Muslim charities was charged Tuesday with lying about his involvement with Osama bin Laden and his al-Qaida network of terror.
In a 35-page criminal complaint, the government contends that Enaam M. Arnaout and the Benevolence International Foundation supported bin Laden operatives who were searching for nuclear and chemical materials and plotting terrorist strikes around the world.
Arnaout, 39, executive director of the foundation, which is based in suburban Chicago, has denied any involvement with terrorists.
Cox Washington Bureau
Signaling that the government's fight against terrorism is expanding, Attorney General John Ashcroft also announced Tuesday that a federal grand jury had indicted a Colombian rebel group and six of its members on charges of murdering three Americans.
Known as the Revolutionary Armed Forces of Colombia, or FARC, its Spanish acronym, the rebel group has waged a terrorist campaign against that country's government for the last four decades.
The complaint against Arnaout alleges he has close ties to bin Laden and his top aides dating back to the 1980s, when the Syrian-born naturalized American was living in Pakistan.
For example, in 1989 bin Laden asked Arnaout to care for one of his wives at his home in Pakistan until he could pick her up, according to the government.
Arnaout was an "administrator" for bin Laden, distributing funds on his behalf, according to a confidential witness cooperating with the government.
The complaint also alleges that the foundation sponsored the visa and paid for the housing in Bosnia of Mamdouh Salim, a key bin Laden associate who allegedly approved the purchase of uranium for making a nuclear weapon.
And the al-Qaida operative ordered to carry out the purchase of the uranium, Mohamed Bayazid, used the foundation's address in Illinois to obtain a driver's license, according to the complaint.
Salim was arrested in Germany in 1998 and is awaiting trial in New York City.
U.S. Magistrate Judge Ian Levin ordered Arnaout held until a detention hearing next Tuesday.
The foundation's attorney, Matthew Piers, called the government's criminal complaint "bizarre." Arnaout and the foundation have not been charged with terrorism. They have been charged with perjury stemming from a civil lawsuit initiated by the foundation.
"The government, having gone through this charity with a fine-toothed comb, hasn't charged him with terrorism, but has charged him with perjury. I think this is compensation for the fact that the war on terrorism is failing," said Piers, who went on to compare the arrest to the detention without terrorism charges being brought of more than 1,400 people since the Sept. 11 attacks.
The Treasury Department froze the charity's assets Dec. 14 in a nationwide crackdown on groups suspected of funneling money to overseas terrorist organizations.
In response, Benevolence International filed a lawsuit against Ashcroft in federal court seeking its assets back.
In recent court filings, Arnaout declared in a sworn statement: "BIF has never provided aid or support to people or organizations known to be engaged in violence, terrorist activities, or military operations of any nature. BIF abhors terrorism and all forms of violence against human beings."
Patrick Fitzgerald, the U.S. attorney for the Northern District of Illinois, said documents seized by investigators and former al-Qaida members tell a different story.  "The complaint alleges that the Benevolence International Foundation was supporting violence secretly," Fitzgerald said.

Load-Date: May 1, 2002


End of Document