WAR ON TERRORISM: Chambliss slams CIA for Sept. 11;
'No excuse for their inaction'
 The Atlanta Journal-Constitution
September 6, 2002 Friday
Home Edition


Copyright 2002 The Atlanta Journal-Constitution


Section: News;
Length: 615 words
Byline: MELANIE EVERSLEY
Body


Washington --- The Sept. 11 terrorist attacks on the World Trade Center and the Pentagon happened, in part, because of the bureaucratic culture at the CIA, Rep. Saxby Chambliss (R-Ga.) testified Thursday.
More money went into building facilities than recruiting agents, Chambliss told the House Permanent Select Committee on Intelligence.
The agency also relied too much on overseas agents who had ties to their respective governments, which led to potential conflicts of interest, said Chambliss, who heads the House Subcommittee on Terrorism and Homeland Security.
AJC
"CIA became overly dependent on these foreign services which, when push comes to shove, always act in their own interest," he said.
"What we discovered after 9/11 about the way in which al-Qaida operatives were functioning freely in Europe, Africa, the Middle East and Southeast Asia clearly demonstrates the pitfalls of a strategy that relied too much on others in the spying game," Chambliss said.
A CIA spokesman said that the agency, based in McLean, Va., "respectfully" had no comment.
Chambliss said he recognized that the CIA had been slowed in its attempts to improve because it often did not have the budget to make changes.
He and many other members of Congress, including Rep. Jack Kingston (R-Ga.), have pointed out that before Sept. 11 the tendency of Congress was to hold back funds from the intelligence agencies and also to question their usefulness.
The political support had not been there, Chambliss said.
But he mostly disparaged the CIA during the first public hearing on the report that his subcommittee completed in July. The report explored the responses by the intelligence community and law enforcement to the terrorist attacks.
In July, when the unclassified portions of the report were made public, Chambliss and the ranking minority member of the subcommittee, Rep. Jane Harman (D-Calif.), faulted a lack of communication between government agencies for the attacks. But those comments were not as strident as the ones Thursday.
The findings of Chambliss' group eventually will be incorporated into Congress' formal recommendations for fighting terrorism.
The intelligence community also lags behind the terrorists when it comes to computer technology, Harman said. Terrorists are communicating with one another through coded messages on Internet Web sites and are way ahead of the American intelligence trying to track them, she said.
"The enemy is digital, and that means that our ways of responding to the enemy are inadequate," Harman said.
The intelligence community should consider enlisting help from the private sector, including the computer companies of the Silicon Valley that have offered their services, she said.
During the 90-minute hearing, Chambliss told the committee that the CIA was guilty of poor communication, of failure to adopt recommendations that would make agents more effective and of lack of training for agents, overall and in foreign languages.
Chambliss, a member of the House Intelligence Committee, said the panel had pressed the CIA to improving its training.
"Yet, the CIA has been slow to respond," Chambliss said. "Slow is actually a generous way of putting it. They have ignored their language and training shortcomings. There is no excuse for their inaction."
The congressman also expressed some exasperation with CIA director George Tenet.
"He has accepted the constructive criticism in the right vein," Chambliss said after the hearing. "Now, is he moving forward as fast as I'd like to see? No, he isn't. All of us dealing with post-9/11 would certainly like to see things move as quickly as possible, and, from a practical standpoint, he's moving as fast as he can."

Graphic

 
Photo: Rep. Saxby Chambliss testifies before a House Committee on Thursday.

Load-Date: September 7, 2002


End of Document