WAR ON TERRORISM: Al-Qaida's web remains a threat, experts warn
The Atlanta Journal-Constitution
December 27, 2001 Thursday,
Home Edition


Copyright 2001 The Atlanta Constitution
Section: News;
Length: 654 words
Byline: MAURICE TAMMAN
Body


Al-Qaida's leadership in Afghanistan appears to have been displaced and perhaps decapitated. But even if the terrorist network's leadership is in disarray, its operatives still could pose a threat, experts warn.
U.S. officials estimate that autonomous al-Qaida units still are operating in 60 countries, including the United States, Canada and European nations. The organization was set up to survive an assault on its brain trust. It could be capable of continuing attacks without direction from its leadership. And as many as 11,000 people around the globe are believed to have passed though al-Qaida training camps.
AJC
"The difference between al-Qaida and . . . other groups is that it has really been the internationalist of terrorists," said Kimberly McCloud, a terrorism researcher with the Center for Nonproliferation Studies in Monterey, Calif. While other organizations focus, for instance, on trying to transform Egypt into an Islamic state, al-Qaida's efforts have been global, she said.
Under the best scenario, the knockout blow to the network's operations in Afghanistan might have crippled its ability to communicate with other groups and to organize and fund terrorist activity.
Shafeeq Ghabra, director of the Kuwait Information Office in Washington, said many Western experts now overstate the residual strength of the organization. Its defeat has been "massive" and "across-the-board," he contended.
Al-Qaida's losses have not been limited to the caves and mountainsides of Afghanistan, he said. Security agencies all over the world, including those in Middle Eastern countries, have been rounding up al-Qaida members.
"Whatever inspiration it had, and this inspiration came from Afghanistan, from [leader Osama] bin Laden, that is cut off," Ghabra said. "That doesn't mean it's the end, and maybe there is a lot of work that needs to be done. But a lot has been accomplished."
Others fear that the defeat of the Taliban and al-Qaida in Afghanistan could be a catalyst to awaken an underworld that remains largely untouched by U.S. bombs.
Robert Friedmann, chairman of Georgia State University's Criminal Justice Department, said the global network of terrorist organizations that have some allegiance to bin Laden and al-Qaida has been largely dormant since Sept. 11.
"The same way international businesses have conferences, so do the terrorists," Friedmann said. "They had conferences in Khartoum and in Lebanon so they can coordinate their activities. They coordinate the exchange of information, personnel, equipment. It's maybe not as sophisticated as the marketing plans of a major corporation, but, by comparison, not much less sophisticated either. They will be very determined to move on with this kind of activity."
How al-Qaida operatives and allied organizations react to the defeat in Afghanistan depends on what happens to bin Laden, said Stephen Gale, a University of Pennsylvania political science professor and an expert on terrorism.
Bin Laden's death or capture might unleash a wave of ambitious attacks, he said.
"If they really believe he is a martyr and has been killed by the infidel, they could very well promote a whole series of uprisings or attacks simply in retribution," he said.
Bin Laden has not been "running a top-down organization," Gale said. "Think of him more like a venture capitalist sitting on a board . . . giving seed money for the development of the types of attacks that he thinks are consistent with his view of Islamic supremacy."
In Gale's view, it might be best if bin Laden were allowed to escape Afghanistan, if he has not already. If the al-Qaida leader set up operations in another country, his minions would be denied a martyr and the response to the allied victory in Afghanistan might be muted.
"What I would like to see is the rest of al-Qaida dismantled," Gale said. "We are much better off, in a sense, letting him run and seeing where he goes and whom he contacts."

Load-Date: December 27, 2001


End of Document