WAR ON TERRORISM: FBI says al-Qaida is decimated;
Focus is now on Hezbollah, others
 The Atlanta Journal-Constitution
July 27, 2002 Saturday
Home Edition


Copyright 2002 The Atlanta Journal-Constitution


Section: News;
Length: 422 words
Byline: REBECCA CARR
Body


Washington --- Senior FBI officials believe there are now no more than 200 hard-core al-Qaida members throughout the world.
That figure, far less than recent press reports suggested were in the United States alone, is based on evidence gathered by the FBI and CIA and includes al-Qaida members in custody at Guantanamo Bay.
One report had previously suggested al-Qaida might have as many 5,000 members, who had pledged their allegiance to Osama bin Laden.
Cox Washington Bureau
While thousands of Islamic extremists and future terrorists have passed through bin Laden's training camps, not all are considered actual al-Qaida operatives. The war in Afghanistan also appears to have successfully dispersed, killed or captured al-Qaida leaders, leaving the terror network fractured and diffused.
As a result of its new assessment of al-Qaida's strength, the FBI's counterterrorism division is closely examining Iranian-backed Hezbollah and other radical Shiite Islamic groups.
Traditionally, al-Qaida, run by Sunni Muslims, and Hezbollah, run by Shiite Muslims, functioned separately and did not mingle their resources. But Hezbollah and other Shiite groups have money and safe havens that could help bin Laden's organization.
To keep better track of the other terror groups, the FBI has launched a new International Terrorism Operations Center within the counterterrorism division.
"If we don't keep our focus on Hezbollah, Iran, Iraq, Hamas, the Shia side of the house, we are putting ourselves in a very deep hole because if they decide to join the fray with al-Qaida, with the Sunni side, Sunni extremists, this country is in very serious trouble," a senior FBI official said. The FBI also has created a plan to substantially enhance the agency's ability to detect, investigate and prevent terrorist attacks.
The plan, revealed to the House and Senate intelligence committees in a closed-door session Thursday, calls for dramatically improving the bureau's analytical capabilities.
The goal is to ensure that FBI information on terrorist threats rapidly moves from the bureau's 56 field offices to the counterterrorism division at headquarters in Washington.
A new group of FBI "report officers" will take raw intelligence and information from the field and put it into a format that can be sent to local, state and federal agencies trying to prevent the next terrorist attack.
A senior CIA official is now in the process of training FBI agents to create these reports.
 
* ON THE WEB: FBI's official Web site with terrorism information www.fbi.gov 

Load-Date: July 27, 2002


End of Document