WAR IN THE GULF;
War Summary
The New York Times
February 26, 1991, Tuesday, Late Edition - Final


Copyright 1991 The New York Times Company
Distribution: Foreign Desk
Section: Section A;; Section A; Page 13; Column 3; Foreign Desk; Column 3;; Summary
Length: 443 words
Body


BAGHDAD SPEAKS OF WITHDRAWAL
 
Baghdad radio said Iraq's armed forces had been ordered to make an orderly withdrawal from Kuwait, and Iraqi tanks and trucks were reported heading north from Kuwait. But Washington dismissed the broadcast, saying that there had been no authoritative communication of its message, and that the war would go on.
 
ALLIES FORGE AHEAD
 
Bombers and attack helicopters roamed ahead of advancing allied armies in southern Iraq and Kuwait as Americans reported their first contact with the Iraqi Army's vaunted Republican Guard. Saudi and Kuwaiti units backed by United States Marines and airborne troops were reported preparing for an assault on Kuwait City, while a Marine amphibious force waited offshore. To the north, the 101st Airborne Division sat astride the Guards' supply lines as two other United States Army units, the First and Third Armored Divisions, were reported closing in on the Guards from the west. For the first time in the war, the allies reported the launching of Iraqi Silkworm anti-ship missiles at allied warships off Kuwait, but no damage was reported. Baghdad reported crushing allied ground attacks, with allied troops "rolling in their blood and shame."
 
TERRORISM: 'THE ONLY IRAQI SUCCESS'
 
Citing the destruction of Kuwait oil wells and reports that buildings were being blown up and citizens executed in Kuwait City, an allied Central Command spokesman said that "terrorism remains the only Iraqi success to date." The top Saudi general said he hopes to bring war crimes charges against those responsible.
 
WAR LOSSES
 
ALLIED FORCES
 
Troops: In the worst Scud attack of the war, at least 27 American soldiers were killed and 98 were wounded when an Iraqi missile demolished a barracks in Saudi Arabia. Before the Scud attack, American casualties since the allied ground offensive began were listed as 4 killed and 21 wounded. From Jan. 17 to Feb. 23, 23 Americans were reported killed, 34 wounded and 9 missing. Five allied Arab soldiers were reported killed and 20 wounded in ground action.
 
Aircraft: Four American aircraft were lost, with three of the five pilots rescued, bringing to 27 the tally of American planes lost in combat. Other allies have lost 9.
 
IRAQI FORCES
 
Troops: Iraqi troops continued to surrender en-masse, with the total now reported to about 20,000. There have been no reports from either side on the number of Iraqi dead and wounded.
 
Armor and Weaponry: An "extremely conservative" count by American commanders listed more than 270 Iraqi tanks destroyed in two days, including 35 of their top-of-the-line T-72's. Extensive destruction of artillery batteries was also reported by the allies.

Load-Date: February 26, 1991


End of Document