War on terrorism
Spokesman Review (Spokane, WA)
December 23, 2001 Sunday Spokane Edition


Copyright 2001 Spokane Spokesman-Review
Section: MAIN NEWS; Pg.A15; QUESTION & ANSWER
Length: 480 words
Byline: Interactive Editor Ken Sands
Body


Question: Would any military action we might take outside of Afghanistan be
 considered  a first strike? How would we portray it as ''defense" if we are
 not immediately responding to a direct threat?
 Answer: There are a lot of potential scenarios as the war on terrorism
 begins to focus outside of Afghanistan, according to Lt. Col. Dave Lapan, a
 Department of Defense spokesman at the Pentagon. Financial, diplomatic and
 police actions already have taken place in other countries around the world.
The ways in which military force might be used against terrorists depends upon
 the country.
 ''Pakistan, for instance, has supported the war on terrorism," said Lapan.
 ''Using that as an example, we would rely on the government of Pakistan to go
 after the terrorists."
 What about other countries that don't police terrorists? ''President Bush
 has said that we're taking the fight to the terrorists, wherever they are,"
 Lapan said.
 After Sept. 11, the Bush administration considers such action against
 terrorists to be in self-defense. ''Countries that haven't gotten the message
 or don't want to take action to root out terrorism in their midst are taking a
 big risk," Lapan said.
 Q: We've heard of ''at least a couple of dozen" civilians killed or
 wounded in Afghanistan. What is a valid count of civilians caught in the
 bombing?
 A: ''There's no way of telling," said Lt. Col. Lapan. ''We've done
 everything we can to minimize this, and we acknowledge there have been errors
 in which civilians have been killed, but we have no way of knowing how many."
 Q: For the past couple of months, only the first names of military
 personnel stationed overseas in and around Afghanistan were used. Now, all of
 the sudden, both the first and last names are used. What's the reason?
 A: Different branches of the military follow different guidelines,
 according to Lt. David Faggard, Fairchild Air Force Base spokesman.
 The Air Force still strictly follows the policy of using only first names
 and ranks for personnel interviewed by news organizations. Many of the locally
 produced stories that you've read in The SpokesmanReview about people
 stationed overseas involved Air Force personnel, and therefore listed first
 names only.
 Faggard said that other branches of the military, the Marines in
 particular, don't always follow that protocol, and that's why you've seen
 military personnel identified by both first and last names, primarily in
 stories produced by national or international news organizations.
 Faggard said the first-name-only policy is intended to protect the families
 of military personnel from potential retribution from anti-American terrorists
 who might scan the media for potential targets.
If you have a question, submit it by e-mail to JimC@spokesman.com, or by  
 fax to (509) 459-5482, or by regular mail to Jim Camden, c/o The
 Spokesman-Review, P.O. Box 2160, Spokane WA, 99210.

Load-Date: December 25, 2001


End of Document