War on terrorism not a lost cause
University Wire
September 13, 2004 Monday


Copyright 2004 Daily Targum via U-Wire
Section: COLUMN
Length: 608 words
Byline: By Amy Castelli, Daily Targum; SOURCE: Rutgers U.
Dateline: NEW BRUNSWICK, N.J. 
Body


In response to Mehmet Basoglu's column, "Terribly wrong justification" (The Daily Targum, Sept. 9), I would like to point out some flaws in his argument as well as ask Basoglu a few questions.
It is individuals like Basoglu who misunderstand the meaning of terrorism, not the United States media. Basoglu attempts to rewrite the war on terrorism as "a war on international Islamic fundamentalism." While I have no doubt Islamic fundamentalism is involved with the war on terror, al Qaeda can be defined as a terrorist cell. When 3,000 Americans are killed unexpectedly on their own soil and have to fear another attack from a group of people who hate them, that is terrorism. I'm sure if Basoglu asked the relatives, friends, police officers and firefighters what they thought of the war on terror, they would not reply, "Fighting a war on terrorism is as absurd a concept as fighting a war on guerilla warfare."
Basoglu goes on to accuse the United States because we "slipped out of the boundaries of the war on terror" in regards to the War in Iraq. What Basoglu fails to point out is that there were links between Osama bin Laden and Saddam Hussein. Although bin Laden hates the United States for religious reasons and Saddam hated us for political ones, who is to say they could not gang up in a joint effort against the United States? In fact, this logic makes a lot of sense -- people do it all the time. According to a June 25, 2004, article in The Washington Times, Rowan Scarborough wrote an article about an indictment in 1998 by the Justice Department that stated: "al Qaeda also forged alliances with the National Islamic Front in the Sudan and with the government of Iran and its associated terrorist group Hezbollah for the purpose of working together against their perceived common enemies in the west, particularly the United States. In addition, al Qaeda reached an understanding with the government of Iraq that al Qaeda would not work against that government and that on particular projects, specifically including weapons development, al Qaeda would work cooperatively with the government of Iraq." Therefore, invading Iraq had much to do with a greater war.
Even if Saddam and bin Laden were not linked, the removal of Saddam is still justifiable. Other than his numerous human rights violations, which included throwing citizens of his country into human shredders, Saddam did not comply with U.N. weapons inspections throughout the 1990s. Saddam kept playing with the United States, and luckily President George W. Bush decided it was time for him to stop playing games. The world is definitely better off without Saddam Hussein, and Iraqi people no longer have to live under a dictator's rule.
Basoglu also has the facts all wrong in his assumption that "the presence of our forced in Iraq today has opened the door for Islamic fundamentalist terror." If the United States were not in Iraq, I doubt that would have stopped Islamic fundamentalists. What Basoglu fails to realize is these fundamentalists hate us, and even if we never invaded Iraq and appeased them, they would still attempt to destroy the United States through another act of terror.
Against the thoughts of Basoglu, I believe the present government's policies have proven to be effective when it comes to the war on terror. We have arrested many who are linked to al Qaeda, toppled and captured Saddam Hussein and have not had a domestic terrorist attack since Sept. 11, 2001. Mr. Basoglu, it is possible to win a war against terrorism. I know it, President Bush knows it, and even if it takes time, the entire world will know it.
(C) 2003 Daily Targum via U-WIRE

Load-Date: September 13, 2004


End of Document