War on AIDS part of war on terrorism; Africa's health crisis could affect U.S. national security
Telegraph Herald (Dubuque, IA)
April 8, 2005 Friday


Copyright 2005 Woodward Communications, Inc.
Section: Illinois; Pg. a4
Length: 385 words
Byline: TELEGRAPH HERALD EDITORIAL
Body


As U.S. Rep. Jim Nussle heads into budget negotiations with the Senate, he should go armed with the knowledge that global AIDS funding is critical.
Nussle favors cutting the president's budget request for international programs by $1.4 billion. That's where the federal government earmarks money to fight AIDS. The Senate version of the budget made a much smaller cut to the president's request, then built in funding for AIDS through a specifically designated amendment. When Nussle, chairman of the House Budget Committee, reaches an agreement with the Senate, let's hope the final figure is closer to the Senate version.
There are plenty of important reasons to combat AIDS globally. President Bush thought it was important enough to mention it in his 2003 State of the Union address. "Seldom has history offered a greater opportunity to do so much for so many," Bush said, pledging to the cause $15 billion over five years.
Both Bush and Nussle visited Africa in 2003 and vowed to help the 25 million people living with AIDS in the Sub-Sahara alone. Somewhere along the line, however, the financial commitment waned.
It shouldn't.
AIDS is truly the plague of this generation. The number of AIDS deaths in Sub-Saharan Africa will soon surpass the 20 million Europeans killed by plague in the 1300s.
Besides being the right thing to do from a humanitarian perspective, fighting AIDS in Africa should be considered part of the war on terrorism. The number of African AIDS orphans will number more than 25 million by the end of this decade. An uneducated, poverty-stricken population could experience governmental collapse and chaos - a ripe environment for recruiters for terrorism. It would not take much to persuade these victims to strike at the richest country in the world, which could have done more to help but did not.
Nussle should lead the fight to boost global AIDS funding. If we do not take an active role in addressing this crisis, it will affect us in myriad ways. We claim to want to root out terrorism in all corners of the world. That should include prevention. We cannot dismiss the shocking number of potential recruits in Africa.
Editorials reflect the consensus of the Telegraph Herald Editorial Board: Brian Cooper (chairman), Ken Brown, Libby Burkhart, Monty Gilles, Amy Gilligan and Jim Normandin.

Load-Date: April 8, 2005


End of Document