WAR ON TERRORISM: Gun show loopholes aid terror, ad claims
 The Atlanta Journal-Constitution
May 21, 2002 Tuesday,
Metro Edition


Copyright 2002 The Atlanta Journal-Constitution


Section: News;
Length: 449 words
Byline: WILLIAM WAN
Body


Washington --- Supporters of a bill that requires stricter background checks at gun shows are touting the measure as a way to combat terrorism.
In an ad that appeared Monday in the Capitol Hill publication Roll Call, three mug shots of suspected terrorists appeared with these words beneath: "Terrorists are exploiting the gun show loophole."
Of the three men, one is from the terrorist group Hezbollah, another had ties to the Irish Republican Army and the third is a suspected al-Qaida operative. They reportedly tried to buy weapons illegally at gun shows in Florida, Texas and Michigan.
Cox Washington Bureau
"Foreign terrorists --- buying guns here in America," reads the ad, sponsored by the nonprofit Americans for Gun Safety.
Andrew Arulanandam, spokesman for the National Rifle Association, called the the ad "crass, political opportunism." He said senators sponsoring the bill are trying to take advantage of the Sept. 11 attacks.
"The very notion that a state-sponsored terrorist groups like Hezbollah are buying their weapons one gun at a time at a gun show is absurd," said Arulanandam. "They get millions of dollars from countries like Iran, and they have plenty of weapons."
The ads initially focused on gun safety but switched to terrorism after Sept. 11. Americans for Gun Safety said the switch is legitimate.
"Of course our ads have changed since Sept. 11. What hasn't changed in America since then?" said spokesman Matt Bennett.
Under current law, licensed gun dealers must check their buyers' backgrounds, but unlicensed sellers at gun shows are exempt. The bill, sponsored by Sens. John McCain (R-Ariz.) and Joe Lieberman (D-Conn.), aims to close the loophole but has strong opposition from both sides of the gun control issue.
Supporters of gun control say the bill is too weak, using a strict standard for licensed dealers and a looser one for unlicensed sellers. The NRA complains the bill tries to kill off gun shows with background checks that can take three days while the shows usually last two.
Monday's ad was part of a $1 million campaign for the McCain-Lieberman bill.
Much of the group's money and lobbying clout comes from its founder Andrew McKelvey, millionaire creator of the popular online job-referral service Monster.com. He has concentrated his ads in Colorado and Oregon, trying to push senators in those states to co-sponsor the bill.
McCain plans to bring the legislation to the Senate floor between Memorial Day and July 4 as an amendment to another bill, which will not necessarily be gun-related, according to Bennett.
There are more than 4,000 gun shows a year in the United States. Neither the government nor the NRA knows how many guns are sold at the shows.

Load-Date: May 21, 2002


End of Document