War effort would suffer if civilian federal workers get raise, Bush says August 28, 2003, Thursday
Charleston Gazette (West Virginia)
August 28, 2003, Thursday


Copyright 2003 Charleston Newspapers
Section: News; Pg. P12A
Length: 284 words
Byline: The Associated Press
Body


CRAWFORD, Texas - Giving civilian federal workers a pay raise of more than 2 percent next year would jeopardize the war on terrorism, President Bush said Wednesday.
In a letter to congressional leaders, Bush reiterated his support for giving the nation's 1.8 million federal workers the 2 percent raise he outlined in his 2004 budget proposal.
But a House appropriations subcommittee has included a 4.1 percent raise in its version of the legislation. Military pay is not affected.
"Such cost increases would threaten our efforts against terrorism or force deep cuts in discretionary spending or federal employment to stay within budget," Bush wrote.
Bush announced he was using his authority to change workers' pay structure in times of "national emergency or serious economic conditions."
A national emergency has existed since the Sept. 11, 2001 terrorist attacks, and now includes Operation Enduring Freedom in Afghanistan and Operation Iraqi Freedom, he said.
"Full statutory civilian pay increases costing 13 percent of [the] payroll in 2004 would interfere with our nation's ability to pursue the war on terrorism," he said.
The president said such increases would cost about $ 13 billion alone for the 2004 fiscal year which begins in October - $ 11 billion more than the 2 percent overall federal civilian pay proposed in his budget - and would build in later years.
Federal pay also was an issue in the 2003 budget, in which Bush broke with the normal custom of giving military personnel and civilian employees similar raises. The military received a 4.1 percent raise in basic pay. But Bush cited the national emergency created by the war on terrorism in holding the civilian pay increase to 3.1 percent.

Load-Date: August 28, 2003


End of Document