WAR IN THE GULF: ON ALERT: Terrorism fears taint Americans' mind-set
 The Atlanta Journal-Constitution
March 23, 2003 Sunday
Home Edition


Copyright 2003 The Atlanta Journal-Constitution


Section: News;
Length: 1125 words
Byline: BILL TORPY
Body


It sounds nuts, she knows.
Yet Kimberly Verska's obsession with emergency preparedness gives her comfort as bombs fall overseas and Americans ponder a terrorism backlash.
The Harvard-educated lawyer and mother of one has stockpiled food and water, a portable generator, extra gasoline, duct tape, plastic wrap and a few well-secured guns. She's read --- from Richard Preston's nonfiction medical thriller "The Hot Zone" to survivalist end-of-the-world tracts.
AJC
Advocating for smallpox inoculation has become a passion for the 34-year-old Brookhaven resident. She knows the threat of dying from bioterrorism is infinitesimal compared with, say, dying on I-285. But she wears her seat belt and doesn't tailgate, so she feels she has a fighting chance on the road.
She wants that same sense of control when it comes to terrorist attacks.
Seeking control these days isn't crazy. Federal officials last week said more terrorist attacks are a "certainty." The terrorism alert is back to orange. Grainy war images bombard TV viewers. And foreign enemies vow retaliation.
Verska might be the poster girl for the "new normal."
Interviews with Americans --- both in Atlanta and in past targets such as Washington, New York and Jerusalem --- show feelings of anxiety are ramping up, and people are trying to find ways to adjust.
A New Jersey mother thinks of moving to Hawaii. A Mableton teacher wonders whether that new pneumonia strain is bioterror. An American in Israel doesn't feel the security his American passport once brought. And a school administrator in Washington ponders whether dangerous times will always be with us.
Michael G. Wetter, a San Francisco-area psychologist who treats anxiety disorders and has studied wartime survivors, says Verska's fascination with what may have been considered morbid a couple of years ago is now rational.
"It stems from the uncertainty --- the uncertainty of a certainty," said Wetter, referring to the terrorism prediction. "A lot of it is waiting for the other shoe to drop. There's a feeling of where, when and what do I do?"
Last month, Americans rushed to buy plastic sheeting and duct tape after the government declared a code orange and U.S. Homeland Security Secretary Tom Ridge suggested citizens build a "shelter in place" for use after a chemical or biological attack.
Cindy Taylor, a teacher from Mableton, whose firefighter brother, Vernon Cherry, died in the Sept. 11 attacks, fears the Iraq war will beget more terrorism.
"It scares the mess out of you. I'm telling you, I don't want it," said Taylor, 45. The fear of retaliation is so bad, she said, that she gets a sick feeling in the gut.
Various things trigger a "feeling of pending doom," like the other day when she saw a military truck on a train passing through metro Atlanta. Or when she heard about the mysterious strain of pneumonia originating in Asia.
Dana Longstreet, a mother of three in Maplewood, N.J., shares Taylor's fear. "The United States has offended so many countries and religious groups that another act of terrorism in retaliation seems quite likely to me." She often thinks of places to move, places that seem safer. Texas? Hawaii?
"We have been thinking about moving for a year or so anyway, but the onset of the war and the incessant media coverage have made this task feel all the more urgent to me," she said.
Yet Longstreet asks herself: Am I overreacting? Is everyone else crazy for wanting to stay?
Certainly, New York City-area residents are affected differently from residents in most other cities. There are bridge and tunnel checkpoints, National Guard members on the streets and in the subways, and bomb-sniffing dogs combing the insides of train stations.
Longstreet can't control the feelings of edginess. She doesn't take her children to potential terrorist targets like the Empire State Building. "No matter how much money and energy is poured into security, I don't think it's possible to make New York safe," she said.
New York may be a prime target, acknowledges Neil Kressel, a terrorism expert and psychology professor at William Paterson University in New Jersey.
"But the realistic threat is very small against the individual. People greatly overestimate risk if they can visualize [what they fear]."
The Sept. 11 attacks were vividly visual.
"We've watched . . . two years of intense media and government attention to terrorist attacks; it's no wonder people worry about this," he said. "It's very important to restore a rational calculation to people's risk analysis."
Since there've been no attacks from weapons of mass destruction, terrorists probably do not have the capability. "If they could have done it, they would have," he said.
But Kressel, who supports efforts to attack terror networks and nations that harbor them, says a dose of public fear can be useful. Government officials need to keep public support in the war on terror.
"A general sense of fear helps them," he said.
Arthur Spector, a 64-year-old Boston-born architect living in Jerusalem, knows that general sense of fear. He's almost inoculated to it. "It's like a piece of used sandpaper," he says of his emotions. "With more use, [they] get rubbed down." He moved to Israel in 1962 but has never lost his sense of being American. The Spectors raised their two children between Israel and the United States, and he travels to America or elsewhere at least once a month.
"America has an image problem abroad," he said. "The easiest way to express feelings of anger towards the American government is to lash out at American individuals. I don't live in fear. I won't cut down on travel now. But I do think that an American passport may not be the most loved one in the world."
David Taylor, 49, of Bethesda, Md., an administrator at American University, took some government advice last month and stocked his home with food, water and batteries and made sure evacuation plans were in place at campus buildings. The planning has reminded him of the emergency drills he participated in at DeKalb County's Kittredge Elementary School during the 1962 Cuban Missile Crisis.
"You do indeed go about your daily life, but you factor in this new dimension," Taylor said. The war and heightened terror alert have compounded other events that shook Washington during the past two years --- the 2001 attack at the Pentagon, the ensuing anthrax scare and last fall's sniper shootings.
"How many of these situations do you go through before you realize that these are different times?" asked Taylor. "Are these things always going to be with us, or is this a bad patch? I guess time will tell."
Margaret Coker, Jason Embry, Bo Emerson, Shelly Emling, Joe Ray and Craig Schneider contributed to this article.
COMPLETE COVERAGE ON AJC.COM: UPDATES THROUGHOUT THE DAY

Graphic

 
Photo: Terrorism anxiety led Brookhaven resident Kimberly Verska, with her daughter Sophia, to stockpile food, water, gas, duct tape and a portable generator. / FRANK NIEMEIR / Staff

Load-Date: March 23, 2003


End of Document