War on terrorism and war on Iraq not the same
University Wire
September 25, 2003, Thursday


Copyright 2003 The Daily Athenaeum via U-Wire
Section: COLUMN
Length: 519 words
Byline: By Sara Bott, The Daily Athenaeum
Dateline: Morgantown, W.Va.
Body


I have noticed within the past few weeks of reading letters to the editors and guest columns that a lot of people seem to associate the war with Iraq and the war on terrorism.
This is something I cannot comprehend.
I do not pretend to know every aspect of the war, or every reason for which it was said to be fought, but I do believe that I know the two have nothing to do with one another.
West Virginia U.
I have no clue how Saddam Hussein and the cruel actions he has taken out on the people of Iraq made the World Trade Center fall. I was under the assumption that Osama bin Laden's followers boarded those planes and flew them into the trade centers and the Pentagon.
I was under the assumption that Osama had gone on the record saying that he hated Saddam Hussein and would have nothing to do with him. I was under the assumption that the two were completely separate events.
But apparently I was wrong.
Apparently the war on terrorism is the war with Iraq.
Apparently the fact that Iraq has/might have/could have/should have weapons of mass destruction means they took out the towers or were planning on it.
Apparently Saddam Hussein was planning on using these so-called WMDs against the United States, even though he supposedly has had them for years and has never come close to using them.
Apparently Saddam Hussein was planning on terrorizing the U.S. the way Osama bin Laden did.
Otherwise I cannot understand why people would say that we are fighting in Iraq to prevent terrorism in the United States.
Even our president has said this, which makes no sense to me because I thought we were fighting in Iraq to help free the Iraqi people and establish a democracy so they will no longer be under the leadership of a dictator.
Is that not what we are doing? And if it is, why would that cause terrorism in the U.S.? Why would we have to worry about protecting our streets from a dictatorship?
I can understand our fight against terrorism. I can understand America wanting to find those who took so many innocent lives and to make those people pay for their actions. And I can understand the war with Iraq was about freeing the people from Saddam's regime and establishing a democracy.
What I cannot understand is how the two have anything to do with each other. What I cannot understand is why people are associating the two with each other. What I cannot understand is why we need to be protected from terrorism from Iraq when the terrorists who were in the U.S. were not from Iraq. What I cannot understand is how any normal, red-blooded human able to read a newspaper, listen to the radio or watch television can associate the two events.
The war on terrorism and the war with Iraq are two completely separate wars; one is being fought on land in Iraq and one was fought on the home front and across the world. One cannot be compared to the other, for one is a REAL war with military presence and costing billions of dollars, and one is a phrase for a united front trying to prevent another catastrophic event like 9/11 from happening.
(C) 2002 The Daily Athenaeum via U-WIRE

Load-Date: September 25, 2003


End of Document