WAR IN THE GULF: Security;
With No Signs of Terrorism, F.B.I. Still Adds Precautions
The New York Times
January 20, 1991, Sunday, Late Edition - Final


Copyright 1991 The New York Times Company
Distribution: Foreign Desk
Section: Section 1;; Section 1; Part 1; Page 18A; Column 1; Foreign Desk; Part 1;; Column 1;
Length: 969 words
Byline: By DAVID JOHNSTON, Special to The New York Times

By DAVID JOHNSTON, Special to The New York Times
Dateline: WASHINGTON, Jan. 19
Body


Federal law-enforcement officials say they have no hard evidence that the Persian Gulf war will lead to terrorist acts in the United States, but they say extra security precautions are justified.
On that premise, the Federal Bureau of Investigation has begun an aggressive program intended to heighten vigilance in the United States and to serve as a warning to President Saddam Hussein of Iraq that plotting terror is futile.
Mr. Hussein has said in several speeches that he will use any means possible to widen the conflict, which American officials have interpreted as a threat to use terrorism. Today Abu Abbas, head of the Palestine Liberation Front, called on Palestinians to strike at the interests of the United States and its allies.
"Hurry and strike at and destroy the interests of U.S. imperialists and their allies," he said in a broadcast over Iraqi radio.
It was because of such threats, that the F.B.I. rapidly expanded its program in recent weeks. Officials said that the program relies on measures like electronic eavesdropping and other information collected here and abroad on suspected terrorists.
"We are doing everything we possibly can to make the environment as hostile as we can," a senior Justice Department official said.
The program also involves seeking out Iraqi nationals who have overstayed their visas and conducting criminal investigations.
But the F.B.I.'s tactics, including interviews with Arab-American leaders, have inflamed fears that the Justice Department has responded to the crisis by reverting to the style of J. Edgar Hoover, whose agents tracked imagined subversives and spied indiscriminately on political dissidents.
"We want the F.B.I. to be vigilant, and we support the F.B.I.'s anti-terrorism efforts," said Representative Don Edwards, a Democrat of California, who is chairman of the House Judiciary subcommittee on civil rights. "But we must avoid infringements of our civil liberties."
Bureau officials said that since 1982, when counter-terrorism was made a priority within the agency, agents have largely succeeded in preventing terrorist attacks in the United States. They said the number of such attacks declined to 5 in 1990, from 25 in 1986. Senior Justice Department officials concede that the threat of terrorism stemming from the conflict with Iraq remains at a "low level."
But those senior officials said the precautionary measures are necessary. They point to a variety of chilling factors, like Mr. Hussein's statements, the existence of a training camp of the Abu Nidal terrorist organization in Iraq and the recent movements of some members of the Palestine Liberation Organization from their bases in Lebanon and elsewhere to undisclosed locations.
Terrorism experts said fears are further heightened because support groups of the Abu Nidal group and the P.L.O. are known to exist in the United States.
Throughout the week, the F.B.I. increased security at its own offices and operated on a "terrorist advisory," which warns of a general possibility that such acts could occur, although there have been no specific threats.
The bureau also increased security on Capitol Hill. The leadership of Congress and at least six members of the House and Senate have been provided armed guards and other protection after a marked increase in threats of violence against lawmakers, two Congressional officials said today.
The officials, a member of Congress and an aide, said that F.B.I. agents and the Capitol police force are accompanying the members, most of whom were not identified.
For the last week, armed guards have been posted at the homes of the congressional leadership, said one official. Shotgun-toting police have been visible in force on the Capitol grounds, and new barricades have been erected at one key entrance to congressional office buildings.
 
 1 KILLED BY TERRORIST BOMB
 MANILA, Jan. 19 (REUTERS) -- An Iraqi man was killed and another man was wounded today when a bomb they were apparently trying to plant at United States offices in Manila, exploded prematurely, the Philippine police said. The attempted attack was believed to be the result of Mr. Hussein's call to carry the gulf war to other parts of the world.
The Philippine police said the bomb contained 200 pounds of explosives and was probably aimed at a building housing the Thomas Jefferson Library and other American offices. It exploded less than 100 yards from the building.
 
GREECE EXPELLS IRAQIS
ATHENS, Jan. 19 (Special to The New York Times) -- Greece expelled four Iraqis to Libya today and arrested five others on suspicion that they were planning terrorist activity, a police spokesman said. The move came with the expulsion of most of the Iraqi diplomats here.
The spokesman said two of the five Iraqis who were seized were later released, and that the remaining three were to be expelled on Sunday. Also flown out to Libya today were 23 of Iraq's 30 diplomats, who were ordered out of the country by the Government.
All Western embassies and missions, Greek airports and many foreign businesses are being guarded by armored vehicles and heavily armed police officers, while diplomats and foreign nationals in general have been advised to stay indoors. The British and American schools here have been temporarily closed.
 
Diplomats Flee Lebanon
 BEIRUT, Lebanon, Jan. 19 (REUTERS) --American diplomats in Lebanon have left the country, fearing a backlash because of the war in the Persian Gulf, security officials said.
They said Ambassador Ryan Crocker and his staff flew to Cyprus by helicopter after Palestinian and Arab extremist groups threatened to attack United States interests to avenge air strikes by the American-led coalition on Iraq. Mr. Crocker assumed his post in Lebanon in November, 14 months after the embassy was closed because of threats by Christian hardliners.

Load-Date: January 20, 1991


End of Document