War on terrorism veterans receive honors
St. Joseph News-Press (Missouri)
September 2, 2006 Saturday


Copyright 2006 St. Joseph News-Press
Distributed by McClatchy-Tribune Business News
Section: STATE AND REGIONAL NEWS
Length: 484 words
Byline: Marshall White, St. Joseph News-Press, Mo.
Body


Sep. 2--Members of the 139th Airlift Wing paused Friday to honor three veterans of the war on terrorism.
Retired Col. Robert N. Agee, a former vice commander of the wing, didn't know he was the guest of honor until Maj. Gen. Steve McCamy, Missouri's assistant adjutant general for air, and Col. Stephen Cotter, the current commander of the wing, called Mr. Agee front and center for presentation of the Legion of Merit. The new legionnaire joined an elite club that includes Lt. Anna A. Bernatitus, a Navy nurse who served at Bataan and Corregidor, and the highly decorated Army Vietnam veteran David Hackworth as well as retired Col. Gene Davenport, a former commander of the 139th. Mr. Agee's father Robert E. Agee, a retired chief master sergeant who served in the 139th, was present to see his son receive the medal.
Following the medal presentation Lt. Col. Ralph Schwader and Lt. Col. Michael McEnulty were promoted to the rank of colonel.
A St. Joseph native, Mr. Schwader, 43, serves as commander of the 139th Operations Group. He has been called to serve in operations Desert Shield, Desert Storm, Provide Hope, Provide Comfort, Joint Forge, Uphold Democracy, Southern Watch, Noble Eagle, Iraqi Freedom and Enduring Freedom. In December, he deployed to Uzbekistan serving as commander of the 774th Expeditionary Airlift Squadron. A 1981 graduate of Central High School and a 1986 graduate of Missouri Western State University with a bachelor's degree, Mr. Schwader has previously been awarded the Meritorious Service Medal, the Air Medal with three oak leaf clusters, the Aerial Achievement Medal with one oak leaf cluster, and an Air Force Commendation Medal.
A Wichita, Kan., native, Mr. McEnulty, 44, serves as vice commander of the Advanced Airlift Tactics Training Center. The new colonel has been on active duty in operations Just Cause, Desert Shield, Desert Storm, Joint Forge, Noble Eagle, Iraqi Freedom and Enduring Freedom. In 2004, he deployed to Uzbekistan serving as commander of the 774th Expeditionary Airlift Squadron. A graduate of Wichita State University. Mr. McEnulty has previously been awarded the Meritorious Service Medal, the Air Medal with three oak leaf clusters, the Aerial Achievement Medal with one oak leaf cluster, and an Air Force Commendation Medal with one oak leaf cluster.
Family members including the parents of both officers were present for the ceremony. Afterwards, both new colonels presented their wives and mothers with a dozen red roses.
To see more of the St. Joseph News-Press or to subscribe to the newspaper, go to http://www.stjoenews-press.com. Copyright (c) 2006, St. Joseph News-Press, Mo. Distributed by McClatchy-Tribune Business News. For reprints, email tmsreprints@permissionsgroup.com, call 800-374-7985 or 847-635-6550, send a fax to 847-635-6968, or write to The Permissions Group Inc., 1247 Milwaukee Ave., Suite 303, Glenview, IL 60025, USA.

Load-Date: September 7, 2006


End of Document