Warnings show al-Qaida resilience; Terrorism fears were rekindled last week when the U.S. closed some embassies and issued alerts in response to a possible attack being planned. Suspicion immediately fell on al-Qaida’s branch in Yemen.
Dayton Daily News (Ohio)
August 11, 2013 Sunday


Distributed by Newsbank, Inc. All Rights Reserved
Copyright 2013 Cox Ohio Publishing. 
Section: MAIN; Pg. A6
Length: 883 words
Body


‘ On the run’ or on the rebound?
The Obama administration’s sweeping response last week to an alleged al-Qaida plot  closing diplomatic posts in parts of Africa, the Middle East and Asia  suggests a terrorist organization that’s capable of striking virtually anywhere, not the one U.S. officials have depicted as a group that’s near defeat. 
Counterterrorism analysts said the U.S. government’s response to a threat emanating from Yemen was at odds with the administration’s message. For at least the past two years, officials have sought to reassure Americans that al-Qaida is “on the run,” while counter-terrorism experts were warning about the affiliates that have wreaked havoc in North Africa, Yemen, Iraq and Syria. 
“The actions the administration is taking now are deeply inconsistent with the portrait of al-Qaida strength the administration has been painting,” said Daveed Gartenstein-Ross, a counterterrorism specialist at the Foundation for Defense of Democracies, a Washington research institute. 
A haven for terrorists 
Al-Qaida in the Arabian Peninsula (AQAP) is considered al-Qaida’s most dangerous branch, and the impoverished nation of Yemen is its home. 
The worldwide terror alert last week came in response to intercepted communications from Ayman al-Zawahri, Osama bin Laden’s successor as al-Qaida chief in Pakistan, to the head of the Yemen branch, Nasser al-Wahishi. 
The group has been bolstering its operations in Yemen in the past few years after key Saudi operatives fled there following a crackdown in their homeland. The group is estimated to have hundreds of fighters and thousands of followers. 
Al-Qaida’s evolution 
Al-Wahishi’s rise in Yemen underscores the transformation of al-Qaida from a relatively small group led by bin Laden into a diffuse global organization with many branches. Experts say it’s no longer accurate to talk about a core al-Qaida that’s in charge of groups operating in the Arabian Peninsula, North Africa, Iraq and Syria. 
“The great fiction al-Qaida perpetrated on the West is that a centralized, hierarchical group controlled things from a cave in Afghanistan. That might’ve been true five years ago, but it’s certainly not true now,” said Christopher Swift, a professor at Georgetown University who advises U.S. officials on counterterrorism strategy. 
The U.S. strategy 
The United States has carried out dozens of drone strikes against militants in Yemen over the past two years, a sign that officials consider the group a serious threat. 
Officials worry most about Ibrahim Hassan al-Asiri, who designed the “underwear bomb” that nearly brought down a U.S. airliner over Detroit on Christmas Day 2009. 
But most analysts say AQAP is not as potent as al-Qaida was under bin Laden. “AQAP has the desire and capability for striking the U.S. at home, but it has yet to show the kind of skill and logistical maturity that the core al-Qaida demonstrated,” said Daniel Benjamin, a former State Department counterterrorism coordinator. 
Some observers said they believe the administration overreacted by closing diplomatic posts last week because of the political fallout from the attack last year on the diplomatic mission in Benghazi, Libya, that killed Chris Stevens, the U.S. ambassador. 
But several U.S. intelligence, defense and congressional officials described a growing body of intercepted communications among jihadists over the past few months that culminated in worrisome conversations between al-Zawahri and al-Wahishi. 
“It’s a very high threat environment with al-Qaida right now because of the quality, quantity and seriousness of the intelligence we’re getting,” said one congressional official who receives regular updates from the CIA and Defense Intelligence Agency. 
Sources: Associated Press, New York Times, McClatchy Newspapers, Washington Post, Bloomberg News 
Terrorism in Yemen 
Oct. 12, 2000 Suicide attack on the USS destroyer Cole kills 17 U.S. military personnel. Sept. 17, 2008 Two car bombs outside the U.S. embassy in Sanaa kill 19; no American casualties. January 2009 Saudi and Yemeni al-Qaida branches say they have formed the Yemen-based al-Qaida in the Arabian Peninsula. Sept. 30, 2011 U.S.-born cleric Anwar al-Awlaki is killed in U.S. drone strike. Aug. 4, 2013 19 embassies and consulates closed after al-Qaida threat intercepted. 
AL-QAIDA’S FACE IN YEMEN 
Nasser al-Wahishi was bin Laden’s personal assistant in Afghanistan when the attacks of Sept. 11, 2001, were planned. Now he’s the leader of the most feared branch of al-Qaida, a man who some think may be in line to take over the organization. 
After Sept. 11, al-Wahishi fled to Iran, where he was detained and deported to his native Yemen. 
In February 2006, he was among 23 al-Qaida members who escaped prison, crawling through a tunnel to a mosque. 
His followers admire al-Wahishi’s many narrow escapes from U.S. drone strikes and his status as a bin Laden protege. However, he has steered an independent course from his mentor, focusing his efforts on claiming land in Yemen rather than trying to attack the United States, as bin Laden advised. 
But after bin Laden’s death, al-Wahishi posted a eulogy on extremist websites in which he warned Americans that “the matter will not be over” with bin Laden’s death and that “what is coming is greater or worse.”

Load-Date: November 30, 2023


End of Document