Was It Terrorism - or Law Enforcement?
Christian Science Monitor (Boston, MA)
August 10, 1989, Thursday


Copyright 1989 The Christian Science Publishing Society
Section: OPINION; Pg. 19
Length: 685 words
Byline: Louis Rene Beres. Louis Rene Beres, professor of international relations and international law at Purdue University, is the author of ''Terrorism and Global Security: The Nuclear Threat.''
Body


IN criticizing Israel's seizure of Sheik Abdul Karim Obeid, a leader of the Hezbollah terrorist group based in West Beirut, the Bush administration described Jerusalem's commando action as ''kidnapping.'' Significantly, such a characterization not only rewards anti-American terrorists, it also contradicts international law. Creating a dangerous and false parallel between murderers and those who seek an end to murder, the President lost a critical opportunity to transform United States policy of terrorism from bargaining and surrender to strength and determination.
Confronted with Americans taken hostage by Sheik Obeid and others in the militant Shiite Party of God, the Reagan administration responded by sending arms to the terrorists. Israel, on the other hand, decided - as it always does - to take counter-terrorism seriously. Seizing Obeid, it acted precisely as American policy calls upon our country to act, with skill, courage, and resolve. For such action it received only hypocritical condemnation from Washington.
As recognized by both US and international law, individual countries have the right and the obligation to apprehend and punish terrorists. Existing in a world legal system that lacks effective and authoritative central institutions to deal with such criminals, it is up to civilized nations to act on behalf of order and justice. This obligation is all the greater where particular states that harbor known terrorists - in this case Lebanon - are unwilling or unable to honor the legal requirements of extradition. The abduction of terrorists is not kidnapping, but its very opposite - law enforcement.
Sovereignty is never absolute. Current US law grants extraterritorial jurisdiction over terrorist acts against US nationals abroad. Codified at Chapter 113A of the Omnibus Diplomatic Security and Antiterrorism Act of 1986, this principle actually supports Israel's seizure of Obeid and contradicts President Bush's description of the seizure as kidnapping.
On Dec. 9, 1985, the United Nations unanimously adopted a resolution condemning all acts of terrorism as ''criminal.'' Yet, even for acts of terrorism already criminalized by prior treaties and conventions (e.g. hijacking), international cooperation and punishment of offenders remains essentially nonexistent. Although the long-standing ''extradite or prosecute'' formula applies, power politics always prevail. Lebanon would hardly have been able to honor an extradition request for Obeid from Israel or anywhere else, nor would it have been able to prosecute the terrorist leader in Lebanese courts.
Any just system of national and international law must regard kidnapping as a crime, but not every abduction (for example, Israel's capture of Nazi war criminal Adolph Eichmann) is a kidnapping. We have always recognized in our ethical and legal codes that there exist circumstances where an action that is normally criminal becomes an act of law enforcement. Israel's seizure of Obeid is such a circumstance.
What about jurisdiction? By the standards of contemporary international law, terrorists are known as hostes humani generis, common enemies of humankind. Like pirates - who were ''to be hanged by the first persons into whose hands they fall,'' according to the distinguished 18th-century scholar Emmerich de Vattel - terrorists are international outlaws who fall within the scope of ''universal jurisdiction.'' The fact that Obeid's crimes had been directed most specifically at Israel removes any doubts about that country's authority in the matter.
For the moment, most of the world appears to have forgotten that Israel faces a daily and urgent threat to its very existence and that protection of Israel's citizenry sometimes requires bold and forceful action. Although it is easy for Americans to overlook that Israel's actions have been consistent with US policy and to regard abduction as objectionable, Israel has no choice but to defend itself from violence. That it has done so in a law enforcing manner at a time when our country opts publicly for cowardice and capitulation warrants respect and praise.


End of Document