Wasatch Front Officials Prepare for Terrorism; 'This is becoming a real threat,' says participant at training conference focusing on coordination
Salt Lake Tribune (Utah)
April 25, 1998, Saturday


Copyright 1998 The Salt Lake Tribune
Section: Utah; Pg. B2
Length: 363 words
Byline: LOREN WEBB SPECIAL TO THE TRIBUNE
Body


ST. GEORGE -- At 9 a.m. a police dispatcher gets a call from an agitated bailiff at the courthouse who says he has just arrested two men for contaminating the ventilation system with an unknown powder. The men say everyone in the building soon will be dead.
Such a scenario was part of a training conference in St. George put on by the Salt Lake County Fire Department for 34 elected and appointed officials from the Wasatch Front on how to respond to a terrorist attack.
The Salt Lake Valley is one of 120 metropolitan areas in the country to hold the conference funded by the Justice Department and the Federal Emergency Management Agency. The 3 1/2-day event, which ended Friday, was held in St. George so the participants could stay focused on the workshops.
No community is immune to the possibility of a terrorist attack, the group learned. Terrorists have demonstrated that they have the knowledge and capabilities to strike anywhere in the world.
Terrorism is a security concern for planners of the 2002 Winter Olympics in Salt Lake City, and Salt Lake County Fire Department Chief Don R. Berry said emergency training in terrorism is an ongoing process for public and high-ranking local officials.
"Some years, we talk about natural disasters," Berry said. "This year, we are talking about the threat of terrorism and how to be prepared for it. This is becoming a real threat."
The seminar emphasized the importance of a protocol that brings together the efforts of emergency response teams, other agencies and policy-makers at the city, county, state and federal levels to help restore order.
Dennis Stanley, deputy chief of the Salt Lake County Fire Department's emergency services bureau, said the department in the past year received 250 reports of bombs, 93 of them legitimate.
Explosives are a favorite weapon of terrorists, as demonstrated by the bombing of the World Trade Center in New York in 1993 and the Alfred P. Murrah Federal Building in Oklahoma City in 1995.
In both instances, the bombs were hidden in vehicles, but explosive devices also can be planted in pipes or satchels and used to disperse an assortment of chemical, biological, nuclear or incendiary agents.

Load-Date: April 25, 1998


End of Document