WASHINGTON TALK: FOREIGN AFFAIRS;
Jewish Father for Palestinian State?
The New York Times
August 24, 1988, Wednesday, Late City Final Edition


Copyright 1988 The New York Times Company
Section: Section A; Page 16, Column 1; National Desk
Length: 1168 words
Byline: By ROBERT PEAR, Special to the New York Times
Dateline: WASHINGTON, Aug. 23
Body


It seems unlikely: A Jewish philosopher, at the University of Maryland, has emerged as the father of a proposal for Palestinians to declare their independence and establish a state in the territories now occupied by Israel.
Yet the scholar, Jerome M. Segal, insists that there is logic in his proposal, made public four months ago. He says it would not harm the security of Israel because, under his proposal, the new Palestinian state would immediately renounce terrorism, declare itself at peace with Israel, recognize the Jewish state and offer to exchange ambassadors.
Many Palestinian intellectuals and leaders of the uprising in the West Bank and the Gaza Strip have come to agree that the Palestinians living there should unilaterally declare their independence, without trying to negotiate agreements or to get consent from Israel or anyone else. The Israeli authorities found a plan for a ''declaration of Palestinian independence,'' drafted in part by Mr. Segal, when they searched the office of a Palestinian militant, Faisal al-Husseini, in East Jerusalem early this month.
Decision on Destiny
''The Palestinians do not need advance Israeli approval to bring a state into existence,'' said Mr. Segal, who is visiting Israel this week.
Mr. Segal, a tall, bearded research scholar at the University of Maryland's Institute for Philosophy and Public Policy, predicts that the Palestinians will eventually issue such a declaration. ''I merely articulated the inherent logic of the uprising,'' he said in an interview. ''The Palestinian people on the ground will decide their own destiny.''
''It might seem odd that a Jew should offer his thoughts on how Palestinians can be successful in the struggle for statehood,'' he added. ''But the struggle for an independent Palestinian state is also the struggle for a humane and safe Israel. Resolution of the Israeli-Palestinian conflict in a way that provides justice for Palestinians is critical for the Jewish tradition. There can be no Judaism without a commitment to justice.''
Theodore Ellenoff, president of the American Jewish Committee, said today that Palestinians ''should not be misled into thinking that Segal speaks for any significant group of American Jewry or any significant body of American public opinion.''
 
'A Political Fantasy'
Rabbi Marc H. Tanenbaum, director of international relations for the committee, said, ''Segal intends his proposal as serious, but it emerges as a political fantasy because it creates an illusion that the Palestinians are engaged in a peace offensive, and that illusion has little basis in reality.''
Mr. Segal offers unwelcome advice to the Palestinians as well. He was part of a small delegation of American Jews who met with Yasir Arafat, the chairman of the Palestine Liberation Organization, in Tunis in June 1987. He says he urged the P.L.O. leader to ''face the issue of terrorism,'' to make absolutely clear that he and his organization condemned all forms of terrorism, whether inside or outside of Israel.
''If the P.L.O. aspires to be a government, it must start acting the part,'' Mr. Segal said. ''Terrorism undermines the Palestinian cause. Tactics most removed from the taint of terrorism are the most successful.''
Mr. Segal addresses himself not only to Jews in Israel and the United States, but also directly to Palestinians. He published his proposal for ''a two-state solution'' to the Israeli-Palestinian conflict in the East Jerusalem newspapers Al Quds and Al Fajr last April.
Mr. Segal, 44 years old, grew up in the Bronx. His father was born in Poland and immigrated to the United States, where he became a blue-collar worker in the garment industry and also a socialist, a member of the Jewish Labor Bund. After graduating from the Bronx High School of Science and the City College of New York, Mr. Segal received a doctorate in philosophy at the University of Michigan.
He worked for a while on Capitol Hill as an aide to Donald M. Fraser, a Minnesota Democrat who served in the House of Representatives.
 
Founding of Peace Group
About six years ago Mr. Segal helped found the Jewish Committee for Israeli-Palestinian Peace. ''We have a fairly simple platform,'' he said. ''We support a safe and secure Israel. We support a Palestinian right to self-determination, including the right to establish an independent state alongside Israel. And we call upon both the United States and Israel to negotiate with any representative of the Palestinian people, including the P.L.O.''
Just as he chides leaders of Israel and the P.L.O. for some of their positions, he also criticizes the United States Government, saying it has ''participated in a process of demonizing the P.L.O.'' He says the United States is ''uniquely positioned to encourage the evolution of the P.L.O. in a moderate direction,'' but has not used its leverage because it has virtually no direct contact with the P.L.O.
State Department officials say Mr. Segal does not seem to appreciate the complexity of the problems with which they must wrestle. The United States does not support the establishment of an independent Palestinian state. It says the future of the West Bank and Gaza should be decided through negotiations among Israel, its Arab neighbors and the Palestinians.
Under American policy, now codified in Federal law, American officials may not negotiate with the P.L.O. unless it recognizes Israel's right to exist, renounces terrorism and accepts the United Nations Security Council resolutions that establish a framework for peace in the Middle East.
Mr. Segal agrees that the P.L.O. should recognize Israel's right to exist, but says, ''That should be an outcome of negotiations, not a precondition.''
Critics say that Mr. Segal is naive in believing that the Palestinians want to live at peace with Israel; many Israeli leaders say the P.L.O. wants an end to Israel.
The depth of emotions was evident today as Mr. Segal was interrupted by shouts of protest while discussing his proposal at Hebrew University in Jerusalem. The demonstrators waved placards declaring ''Israel Is Not for Sale,'' ''Segal the Voice of Terror,'' and ''P.L.O., Out!''
Milton S. Shapiro, president of the Zionist Organization of America, said Mr. Segal's proposal was ''just an intellectual exercise, which may not be relevant to all the issues that need to be resolved by Arabs and Israelis.'' He said, ''It would be a farce for the Palestinians to say they recognize Israel unless they also renounce the covenant of the P.L.O., which seeks the destruction of Israel.''
Nevertheless, many people give Mr. Segal credit for fresh thinking.
''In the Middle East business, you don't have many original new ideas,'' said William B. Quandt, a senior fellow at the Brookings Institution who served on the staff of the National Security Council under President Carter. ''Almost everything that can be said has been said. But Jerry has helped crystallize a relatively novel approach, injecting an idea into public discussion and spelling out its rationale.''

Graphic

 
photo of Jerome M. Segal (Paul Souders)


End of Document