Washington State U. vigilant for ecoterrorism
University Wire
February 1, 2006 Wednesday


Copyright 2006 Daily Evergreen via U-Wire
Length: 522 words
Byline: By Nick Eaton, Daily Evergreen; SOURCE: Washington State U.
Dateline: PULLMAN, Wash. 
Body


The smoky fingers of domestic terrorism have pointed at Washington State University in the past, but not this time.
WSU was not one of the "government and university research labs in Washington" implicated in a Jan. 24 Associated Press article as potential targets of two extremist environmentalist groups, Assistant U.S. Attorney Kirk Engdall said.
Engdall said he was not in a position to comment on whether any other sites in Eastern Washington were potential targets of the Animal Liberation Front or the Earth Liberation Front, though he said he didn't believe so.
"It is an ongoing investigation," he said. "That's why we're holding our cards so close to our chest."
The ALF attacked WSU in 1991 to protest university and federal research done on animals. In 1999, they struck WSU laboratories in Puyallup, Wash., a week before the World Trade Organization conference in Seattle.
Eleven alleged members of the ALF and ELF were indicted Jan. 19 in Eugene, Ore. on charges related to domestic terrorism, including the 2001 arson at the University of Washington horticultural center.
Of those indicted was Jonathan Mark Christopher Paul, who in 1991 had information related to the attack in Pullman, said WSU Police Sgt. Don Maupin. The FBI arrested him in Ashland, Ore.
Though Maupin admitted local police were unprepared for the 1991 attack, he said WSU is ready to deal with another threat. The WSU and Pullman police departments are part of a Joint Terrorism Task Force based in Spokane, known for arresting a University of Idaho student in 2003 on the suspicion he was a member of al Qaeda.
"We're pretty vigilant with this," Maupin said. "We take it very seriously. These guys are out there."
WSU Police have worked with university departments to bolster security, heighten surveillance and install alarm systems to prevent attacks, Maupin said. Police and security patrols are constantly on the lookout for suspicious behavior around university farms and enclosures. But Maupin did not provide specifics, citing a necessity of secrecy.
"We have more of a direct conduit of information with other law enforcement and educators," he said.
But the possibility of another domestic terrorist attack in Pullman is still real.
"I think any place that conducts any kind of research involving animals can be a target," Maupin said. "The ALF and ELF can select targets anywhere, and it's just important that law enforcement remains informed."
Charlie Powell, the senior public information officer for the College of Veterinary Medicine, said the college is not currently doing any research the ALF or ELF might find offensive, but added that any animal industry is a potential target.
There is indication that the ALF and ELF, once with separate agendas, now often work together, Maupin said. Both groups are historically known as "ecoterrorism" groups, and have claimed responsibility for dozens of attacks on government and private industry factories, farms, power plants, meat packing facilities and ranger stations. While most attacks have been in Oregon, the ALF and ELF have targeted many sites in Washington.
(C) 2006 Daily Evergreen via U-WIRE

Load-Date: February 3, 2006


End of Document