WASHINGTON TALK: BRIEFING
The New York Times
January 25, 1987, Sunday, Late City Final Edition


Copyright 1987 The New York Times Company
Section: Section 1; Part 2, Page 36, Column 1; National Desk
Length: 277 words
Byline: By WAYNE KING and WARREN WEAVER JR.; Shultz Under Fire
Body


Secretary of State George P. Shultz's plan to meet Wednesday with Oliver Tambo, leader of the African National Congress, a militant anti-apartheid organization banned by South Africa, has stirred consternation among conservative Republicans.
Their sharp reaction has created a ticklish political situation for Mr. Shultz.
If he accedes to the demand that he cancel the meeting, he can expect a firestorm of criticism from black leaders and others in this country and abroad who oppose South Africa's system of race laws. If he goes through with the meeting, as expected, he risks alienating some of President Reagan's important anti-Communist supporters at a time when Mr. Reagan needs their help in the Iran-contra affair.
Mr. Tambo is scheduled to arrive in Washington today for a four-day visit. His scheduled meeting with Mr. Shultz impelled 14 members of the House, led by Dan Burton of Indiana, a member of the Foreign Affairs Commitee, to sign a petition urging Mr. Shultz to cancel the meeting. They said, in part, ''We do not understand, in light of your own strong oppostion to terrorism, and President Reagan's clear condemnation of 'calculated terror' by the A.N.C., why you would consider a meeting with Oliver Tambo any more than you would a meeting with Yasir Arafat.''
Jesse Helms of North Carolina, ranking Republican on the Senate Foreign Relations Committee, and Howard Phillips, chairman of the Conservative Caucus, joined Mr. Burton to form the Coalition Against A.N.C. Terrorism, a group designed to press Mr. Shultz to cancel the meeting. The coaltion plans a protest rallly at the State Department at the time of the Wednesday afternoon meeting.

Graphic

 
Photo of Oliver Tambo (NYT)


End of Document