WASHINGTON;
CHRISTMAS IN THE CAPITAL
The New York Times
December 18, 1983, Sunday, Late City Final Edition


Copyright 1983 The New York Times Company
Section: Section 4; Page 19, Column 6; Editorial Desk; op-ed
Length: 820 words
Byline: By James Reston
Dateline: WASHINGTON, Dec. 17
Body


The holiday season is a little more festive this year than last in most places in America, but along the Potomac, there is a difference.
 If anything, the Federal city is more beautiful than ever. Its glittering stores and eager shopping crowds proclaim the recovering economy. Its monuments to Washington, Jefferson, Lincoln and Lee, with their subdued lighting, remind us, just when we need it, of our ideals and where we came from.
And on the two hills that dominate the capital city, there is to the east the blazing dome of the political Congress, and on the western hill the Washington Cathedral, reminding us of our spiritual heritage, with the voices of its children singing the ancient Christmas anthems of peace and joy.
But down in the valley, where the Potomac runs, there are shadows on the lovely walls. There are mechanical barriers at the gates of the President's house. At the entrances to the State Department in Foggy Bottom, there are large cement highway blocks, like vast tombs, erected there apparently in the belief that terrorists in their bomb-trucks would prefer to go into the front door. Even missiles are mounted around the White House to intercept wayward planes that might come over the central city.  All this is new. Across the river at the Pentagon, with its five rings and underground tunnels to take its 23,000 employees back and forth comfortably to work every day, they are now shutting off the tunnels in case some wayward terrorist bomb-truck blows the place up.
And they're right to be careful - after all, somebody exploded a bomb in the Capitol recently - but there is a paradox. Here we are with more military power than ever existed any place on earth, sending our Marines into a bunker in the Beirut Airport and our Navy into the Caribbean and the eastern Mediterranean in the name of security, and we find that all our nuclear weapons and battleship guns don't bring security to Lebanon or Central America, or even to the White House or the Pentagon.
It's an odd Christmas here for other reasons. The poor and the hungry we have always with us. They are an expensive responsibility and the cost has to be addressed in the Federal budget next spring. But Ed Meese should've known that it's not the sort of thing you can dramatize at Christmas, which is a time for pity and compassion.
Yet at this Christmas time, despite the growing fear of terrorism, there are some hopeful signs. In recent weeks, President Reagan has toned down his belligerent rhetoric about the ''evil Soviet empire'' that he once insisted was destined for the ''ash- heap of history.''
In his conversations with Prime Minister Trudeau of Canada here the other day, he agreed with a NATO Declaration of Brussels that the time had come to stop the violent rhetoric of the past and offer the Russians the possibility of reconciliation, and wait for a Soviet response.
So far, there has been no response from Moscow. Whoever is in charge there - and nobody here knows if anybody is in charge - the Soviet reaction has been to break off the arms talks in both Geneva and Vienna. But there will be a meeting in Stockholm in January to discuss the present stalemate, and officials here are waiting to see whether the Russians will attend.
The NATO Brussels Declaration was in a way a kind of Christmas peace offering to the Russians. It said:
''Rejecting any spirit of confrontation, the allies reaffirm their determination to develop contacts and cooperation with the Warsaw Pact countries on the basis of mutual interest. While maintaining a firm and realistic attitude, the allies would welcome any serious proposal aimed at restoring confidence between East and West.''
So far there has been no serious proposal from the other side - only a break or suspension of arms negotiations - but at least there has been a change in the tone and subject in the West from propaganda over missiles to an offer of discussion of wider issues of trade and how to avoid a serious confrontation over the rise of terrorism and a confrontation between the U.S. and the Soviet Union in Lebanon and the Persian Gulf.
What we hear very little about this year in Washington is the Christmas story of peace and good will. In the rest of this country maybe Christmas is as joyful as ever, but Washington is preoccupied by the vicious politics of the world. It's not hungry, Ed Meese says. It's very rich and very powerful, as Cappy Weinberger says, but behind its new cement barriers, no matter what Ronald Reagan says, Washington is not a very happy city this Christmas.  For all its weapons, there is no security, and for all its promises, there is no peace. The only thing they have forgotten around here is the Christmas story of pity and hope. But it will work out somehow. In Washington we are too involved in the tangled politics of the world. But elsewhere in the country the American people are probably more detached and more sensible.


End of Document