WASHINGTON;
CRISIS OF CONFIDENCE
The New York Times
May 7, 1986, Wednesday, Late City Final Edition


Copyright 1986 The New York Times Company
Section: Section A; Page 31, Column 5; Editorial Desk; OP-ED
Length: 760 words
Byline: By James Reston
Dateline: WASHINGTON
Body


The United States and the Soviet Union are now at another critical point in their long struggle to control the nuclear arms race, and it's being complicated by the issue of terror in Libya and the nuclear reactor explosion in the Ukraine.
''What's the use,'' it's being asked here, ''of negotiating a nuclear arms agreement with the Russians? If they conceal the truth of their deadly radioactive accident, not only from their neighboring nations but from their own people?''
''How could we trust them to abide by any nuclear treaty with the United States?''
''What's the use,'' it's also asked in Washington, ''of supporting European allies when they don't support us in our air raid on Libya to punish Qaddafi and control state terrorism?''
These are popular questions, put forward in all sincerity by some influential members of the Reagan Administration and the Congress, and apparently supported by the American people, who are now canceling their summer plans to go to Europe and the Middle East in fear of terror, which in a way is a triumph for Qaddafi.
Keeping the major question of controlling nuclear weapons from being side-tracked by Libya and the disaster in the Ukraine is now the problem.
Clearly, there has been a wide swing of public opinion in the United States against the Soviet Union since its cover-up of the nuclear fire in the Ukraine. And also against most of the European allies since their opposition against the U.S. air raid on Libya.
But long before this recent crisis, the Chief Justice of the United States, Warren Burger, observed in l981 that terror in the United States was much more alarming that terror abroad.
''For the last 10 years,'' he said in Houston, ''many of our national leaders and those of other countries have spoken of international terrorism. But our rate of routine day-to-day terrorism in almost every large city of the United States exceeds the casualties of all the reported 'international terrorists' in any given year.''
The State Department reports that 23 Americans were killed in terrorist attacks abroad last year, and another five Americans were murdered abroad in the first four months of l986, while 1,384 were murdered for one reason or another in New York City alone in 1985. And The New Republic reports that more Americans drowned in their own bathtubs last year than died in terrorist attacks.
This is not to say that President Reagan and the other leaders of the industrial nations were wrong to comdemn state terrorism, though it should be noticed that each insisted on protecting its own interests and dealing with it in its own way. Don't call us, we'll call you.
But it is to say that the main problem, in the interest of all nations, is to prevent Colonel Qaddafi and the disaster in the Ukraine from blocking the negotiations between Washington and Moscow for the control of nuclear weapons.
This is the central question of the last years of the century. Mikhail Gorbachev misjudged the catastrophe in the Ukraine, and very late, tried to recover by calling for help from the international atomic energy control officials and inviting experts from the West to help the poisened wounded.
What the leaders of the industrial nations seemed to understand, perhaps more in their meeting in Tokyo than any of their meetings in the past, is that their economic and financial policies, like the nuclear cloud from the Ukraine, drifts beyond their borders and influences the lives of people beyond their control.
They came out against terror, but terror has many faces, including the staring eyes and swollen bellies of children in the hungry two-thirds of the world. On this tragedy, they had nothing to say.
Adversity and even tragedy has its uses. And it may even be that Mr. Gorbachev learned something by the nuclear disaster in the Ukraine. Maybe he learned something, including the dangers of modern arms and technology, as Mr. Reagan has learned since the recent failures of his satellites. But we can't be sure.
Anyway, though some here may be saying, ''What's the use'' of going on with more summit meetings on arms control, and others may be saying, ''What's the use of allies who don't behave as we like,'' that's not really the view of President Reagan or his principal advisers.
They see - at least some of them -the possibility of some kind of compromise on Afghanistan and even Nicaragua that would ease the tension, and let them go on to a Reagan-Gorbachev meeting later in the year to break the crisis of confidence and make some limited progress on the main problem of nuclear arms control.


End of Document