Washington has lost focus
USA TODAY
March 4, 2003, Tuesday,
FINAL EDITION


Copyright 2003 Gannett Company, Inc.
Section: NEWS;; DEBATE
Length: 500 words
Byline: Tom Barry
Body

Today's debate: The war on terrorism
Opposing view: Shift to 'regime change' in Iraq jeopardizes war on terrorism.
Following the Sept. 11, 2001 terrorist attacks, President Bush assured the nation that he would lead a war to guarantee U.S. homeland security. Announcing the new war on international terrorism, the president vowed: "I will not yield. I will not rest. I will not relent."
No one can accuse the president of being lax. But he has lost focus. Instead of resolutely leading an international coalition that would eliminate the international terrorist networks, he has deviated from the initial course -- focusing instead on what he terms the "axis of evil." As a result, the U.S. finds itself increasingly isolated, and the president is putting the nation at serious risk.
Certainly, there have been victories -- starting with the ouster of the Taliban in Afghanistan and continuing through the capture last weekend of al-Qaeda's operations chief. However, by shifting the focus of the war on terrorism away from targeting actual terrorists to "regime change" in Iraq, the U.S. risks losing the war on terrorism.
Already, the shift in focus from al-Qaeda and the Taliban has had alarming consequences. In Afghanistan, where the war on terrorism began, Islamist militants are making a comeback, and a former prime minister who heads an Islamist party recently has called for a jihad against U.S. troops. Rather than focus U.S. resources on reconstructing Afghanistan, the U.S. diverted resources to an invasion of Iraq. Resurgent warlordism and attacks by resilient al-Qaeda and Taliban forces threaten to unravel the fragile post-liberation security of Afghanistan. Also alarming is the surge of heroin production in Afghanistan -- which has regained its rank as the world's leading exporter.
As most Middle East observers and Arab intellectuals warn, the failure of the U.S. to commit itself to a peaceful settlement of the Israeli-Palestinian dispute gives undue credence to Islamist militants. The president's support for the aggressive policies of Prime Minister Ariel Sharon plays into the hands of those, such as Osama bin Laden, who charge that America's new war on terrorism constitutes a war on the entire Arab world and Islamism. In the occupied territories, these policies have generated new recruits for anti-Israeli and anti-American terrorism.
An unprovoked attack by the U.S. on Iraq surely will lead to a new surge in recruits to radical Islamism that regards the U.S., not Saddam Hussein, as the great evil.
Homeland Security chief Tom Ridge says he alters the color of America's threat alert according to CIA and FBI intelligence information. We won't need Secretary Ridge to tell us the color of the threat level once the president launches the Iraq invasion. Our own intelligence tells it will be Red Alert.
***
Tom Barry is a senior analyst at the Interhemispheric Resource Center where he co-directs the joint Foreign Policy in Focus project with the Institute for Policy Studies. 

Load-Date: March 4, 2003


End of Document