WATCH THE DETAILS
Pittsburgh Post-Gazette (Pennsylvania)
April 4, 2005 Monday
SOONER EDITION


Copyright 2005 P.G. Publishing Co.
Section: EDITORIAL,; LETTERS TO THE EDITOR
Length: 325 words
Body


I was certainly glad to see your March 29 editorial recommending that the Pennsylvania Senate reject House Bill 213, which targets and punishes what it defines as "eco-terrorism" ("Osama Bin Granola," March 29). However, I think that editorial missed a major problem with this very ill-advised legislation.
 In its earlier form, HB 213 focused on punishing acts involving the use of "force or violence or the threat of force or violence." But the revised version of HB 213, and the version that was in fact approved by the Pennsylvania House, eliminates all references to violence or threats of violence and instead defines "eco-terrorism" in terms of "an offense against property."
I have not been able to determine who made this change or why it was made, and many of the bill's proponents continue to insist that it only prohibits acts involving violence or threats of violence. The actual language of the revised bill is quite clear, however, and that language means that an act constituting simple, non-violent trespass could be considered "eco-terrorism" and punished quite severely. Those engaged in non-violent civil disobedience are often charged with trespass. Their punishment for such "crimes" is usually fairly modest.
 Indeed, this country has a long history of respecting, and not excessively punishing, those who engage in non-violent civil disobedience.  This would be a very different country today if a few very brave folks had not been willing to violate the laws against trespass and thereby draw attention to certain unjust situations and policies. Those people were not "terrorists."
 Passing a law that defines similar, non-violent civil disobedience as "eco-terrorism" is contrary to our country's history of respecting and tolerating non-violent protest, demeans those who have been the victims of real, violent terrorism and distracts us from our fight against the continuing threat of genuine terrorist acts.
 TOM BUCHELE
 Edgewood

Load-Date: April 5, 2005


End of Document