Watching out for terror threats 'Fusion center' in Clayton is part of early warning group formed in 2006. Secondary headline
St. Louis Post-Dispatch (Missouri)
December 14, 2011 Wednesday
THIRD EDITION


Copyright 2011 St. Louis Post-Dispatch, Inc. All Rights Reserved
Section: COMMUNITY; Pg. B1
Length: 864 words
Byline: BY PATRICK M. O'CONNELL , poconnell@post-dispatch.com,  314-340-8126
Dateline: 0 
Body


CLAYTON - Imagine the destruction and chaos if a barge loaded with explosives hit the Blanchette Bridge that carries Interstate 70 over the Missouri River.
In addition to casualties, a damaged bridge would cut off a major transportation connection between St. Louis and St. Charles counties, snarl river traffic, cripple power lines and cause widespread environmental damage.
The goal for Sgt. Bill Roche is to make sure scenarios like the bridge attack never happen.
Roche, of the St. Louis County police, leads the St. Louis Terrorism Early Warning Group. The unit was formed in 2006 to collect, analyze and share information to prevent, and if needed, respond to terrorism plots.
The St. Louis region may not have as many terrorist targets as New York or Washington, but with the Gateway Arch and an array of bridges, dams and locks spanning two major rivers that serve as a main commerce artery for the center of the country, the area has plenty of high-profile marks. Major events like the World Series, the baseball All-Star Game and the occasional presidential or vice presidential debate provide additional challenges for anti-terrorism officers.
FUSION CENTERS
Warning group investigators have been involved in many local cases, but they declined to offer specifics.
The "fusion center," as dubbed by staffers, is one of 72 such groups nationwide, including in Jefferson City, Kansas City, Springfield, Ill., and Chicago. At least one fusion center in each state focuses on terrorism investigation.
The St. Louis fusion center is hosted by the St. Louis County police at its Clayton headquarters. The full-time officers have passed stringent background checks and have access to classified federal information and documents.
Roche and other officers with St. Louis, St. Louis County and the Department of Homeland Security work with other federal authorities and local municipalities to streamline intelligence gathering and dissemination. They also try to improve regional communication and make collaborative decisions based on intelligence sharing, efforts law enforcement officials say were lacking in the years before 9/11.
"We weren't always good about sharing it with one another and by doing that, it at least gives us a chance of doing something before it happens," said Kurtis Nelson, the group's full-time civilian intelligence analyst.
Before the national network of fusion centers "the sharing of information wasn't quick, wasn't efficient, wasn't fluid," Roche said.
The information flow is meant to be multi-directional, with local officers encouraged to pass along information to the fusion center.
"We're here to be that point they can reach out to and say, 'Hey, here's something we've got that's happening and we didn't know whether or not you would care,'" Nelson said. "We'll look at that and see if it fits into a pattern or not."
TIPS FROM RESIDENTS
Roche also said local officers and regional fusion center members have gotten better at sharing out-of-the-ordinary cases that seem to be more than a coincidence and have several times determined they are part of an overall pattern.
"Before these fusion centers," Roche said, "that never would have happened."
Funding for the center primarily comes from the federal government. Most of the officers are paid through their departments. St. Louis police said one of its officers assigned to the fusion center specifically monitors buildings in the city considered critical infrastructures and potential targets.
While the FBI investigates most of the headline-grabbing terrorism cases in the region, the fusion center handles countless tips from local residents and area police departments. Tips are encouraged and can be made by contacting the group or filling out a form on its website, stltew.org. Officers and analysts also receive and break down nationwide classified bulletins distributed on noteworthy topics by the Department of Homeland Security and FBI in Washington.
In 2009, for instance, a man in Colorado was going to beauty salons and buying large tanks of hydrogen peroxide that the government suspected was being purchased for bomb-making purposes. The fusion center there contacted other centers nationwide, telling them to be on the lookout for similar acts in their areas.
But many things tipsters find odd are easily explained as non-threats with a little research and communication with other agencies or officers, Nelson said. And with the line between vigilant observation and discrimination blurry, fusion center employees are trained to be sensitive about civil liberties, privacy concerns and racial profiling. A "foreign-looking person" taking photos of Busch Stadium, a "tip" Nelson has received in the past, does not constitute a viable piece of intelligence.
The benefits of the fusion centers stretch beyond terrorism. Roche and other regional directors and officers have established relationships with their counterparts that can prove beneficial to local police investigations. Such cooperation helped Roche put Florissant detectives in touch with Los Angeles-area investigators who had information, and a location for an arrest, on a serious assault suspect long sought in a case turned cold.

Load-Date: December 15, 2011


End of Document