Watson lecturer calls for pacifist response to terrorism
University Wire
October 30, 2002, Wednesday


Copyright 2002 Brown Daily Herald via U-Wire
Length: 860 words
Byline: By Monique Meneses, Brown Daily Herald
Dateline: Providence, R.I.
Body


University of Rochester Professor Robert Holmes compared President George Bush to Osama bin Laden and argued that pacifism, not aggression, will stop terrorism at his lecture Tuesday afternoon at the Watson Institute for International Studies.
The "war on terrorism," he said, is a metaphorical war.
"It's just like a 'war on poverty,'" Holmes said.
Holmes asked why the United States attacked Afghanistan on Oct. 7, 2001. Fifteen out of the 19 hijackers were from Saudi Arabia, most of the planning for the attacks took place in Europe and there was not a single Afghan mentioned in the attack or in the planning phase, he said.
Brown U.
"But yet we chose to attack Afghanistan," he said.
"Once you strip away the patriotism and the nationalism, you are left with George Bush on one hand and Osama bin Laden on the other hand," Holmes said.
He said he found similarities in Bush's and bin Laden's beliefs.
"I see both convinced that he has the absolute truth with a capital 'T,' each willing to kill for the truth and each believing he has major backing from the strongest religion in the world," he said.
War, Holmes said, is a destructive pool that brings in its wake more cruelty and destruction. He described the "war on terrorism" by placing it in the context of the post-Sept. 11, 2001, atmosphere in the United States.
"The atmosphere called for vengeance of relentless retaliation," Holmes said. "When Sen. (John) McCain said, 'God may have mercy on them, but we will not,' that set the tone for what was to follow."
Holmes said discussions on war and terrorism tend to focus on the United States as a collective. But he said this was not a constructive perspective.
"The nation is an abstraction that can only do what humans can do," he said.
Holmes cited quotes from both the Nuremberg and the United Nations charter to support his argument that terrorism should be approached with a pacifistic methodology.
The Nuremberg charter forbids crime against peace, he said. The U.N. Charter Article II says that member states are committed to resolving international disputes in a peaceful way, he said.
The United States had "clearly" violated both charters, he said.
"I can't see anything more clearly in violation of the Nuremberg and U.N. Charters than … what we did in Afghanistan and … what we are planning to do in Iraq," he said.
Just war theory, he said, says that war must be a last resort. Holmes said that when the Taliban proposed Osama bin Laden be tried by an Islamic court, it hinted that it might have made some kind of agreement with the United States.
The Taliban, he said, was in a tough situation. There were signs that it was willing to get rid of bin Laden but was not willing to expose to the Middle Eastern world that it turned over one of their brethren.
"When the Taliban said, 'We don't know where (bin Laden) is,' they were wiping their hands clean," he said.
Holmes said he predicts that current U.S. approaches will not overcome terrorism. One cannot bring an end to terrorism using the very means that gave rise to terrorism in the first place, he said.
"I predict that in five years, people will look back and ask, 'How did we let this happen?'" Holmes said.
He said that the "war on terrorism" could have negative future implications.
"This war on terrorism could inspire baby bin Ladens all over the place," he said.
No single country can prevent terrorism, he said. Military action will not end terrorism, but pacifism could do just that, he said.
Understanding what gives rise to terrorism is important in finding a viable solution to it, Holmes said. The Afghan people have three main grievances, he said. The first is that there are foreign troops on Afghan land, the second is that there is injustice toward people in the Middle East and the third is the U.S. support of Israel in the Israeli-Palestinian war, he said.
He proposed a pacifist alternative to the war on terrorism by opening discussion and debate on issues of conflict, helping put Afghanistan on it feet, calling off the "dogs" of war against Iraq and talking with the very people who we are designating as the enemy.
Peter Romaniuk GS said he disagreed with a lot of what was said in the lecture and criticized Holmes' characterization of facts and his "selective" interpretation. He asked Holmes about issues related to violence and for a response to criticism of pacifism.
"How do you respond to the classic criticism of pacifism?" he asked.
Holmes responded by saying he disagreed with the argument that by killing Afghani people we are saving lives.
One woman asked Holmes about self defense.
"What are the limits of self defense? What makes up self defense?" she asked.
The limits to self defense, Holmes said, are made by specific individuals. "Self defense constitutes the specific orders of those people," he said.
Some audience members criticized Holmes' views, but local resident Alice Brickach said she found him enlightening.
"I was sitting in the lecture and suddenly I thought: 'He should tell the president of the United States what he was telling us today.'"
(C) 2002 Brown Daily Herald via U-WIRE

Load-Date: October 30, 2002


End of Document