Wave of bombings in Baghdad kill 69; Death toll from attacks in the past week over 200.; TERRORISM IN IRAQ
Dayton Daily News (Ohio)
May 18, 2016 Wednesday


Copyright 2016 Dayton Newspapers, Inc.
Section: ; Pg. A10
Length: 395 words
Byline: By Sinan Salaheddin
Body


Citizens inspect the scene after a suicide car bomb hit a crowded outdoor market in Baghdad's eastern Shiite neighborhood of Sadr City, Iraq, on Tuesday.
BAGHDAD - A wave of bombings struck outdoor markets and a restaurant in Shiite-dominated neighborhoods of Baghdad on Tuesday, killing at least 69 people, officials said - the latest in a string of attacks in and around the Iraqi capital that have left more than 200 dead in the past week.
The four separate bombings were a further challenge to the beleaguered government of Prime Minister Haider al-Abadi, who is struggling to prove that his forces can maintain security in Baghdad and elsewhere.
One of the bombings Tuesday struck an outdoor market in the heavily Shiite district of Sadr City, a frequent bombing target. In the wake of the blast, influential Shiite cleric Muqtada al-Sadr, whose support runs deep in the district named after his father, issued a statement to his followers that the attacks "are the clearest evidence that your government has become unable to protect and provide you with security."
The Islamic State group later claimed responsibility for the attack in a statement posted to a militant website used by the extremists.
Fighters with al-Sadr's militia, Saraya Salam, deployed to the streets of Sadr City following the bombing, another indication of a lack of confidence in Iraq's official security forces.
In an online statement, the Islamic State also claimed responsibility for the deadliest bombing of the day in Baghdad's northeastern Shaab neighborhood , killing at least 34 people and wounding 75 others.
In that attack, a roadside bomb exploded outside the concrete blast walls surrounding an open-air market, then a suicide bomber blew himself up as people gathered to help the victims of the first explosion, a police officer said. Later Tuesday, a suicide car bombing hit a crowded outdoor market in Sadr City, killing 18 people and wounding 35 others. Sadr City has been one of the worst-hit districts as the Islamic State group has increasingly employed terrorist attacks against Iraqi civilians far from front-line fighting.
Al-Sadr led anti-government protests last month peaked with the breaching of the Green Zone. The Iraqi government has been largely paralyzed. Officials say they are concerned political instability is distracting from the fight against the Islamic State.

Load-Date: May 18, 2016


End of Document