We are ready to send 500 Bodo youth to fight Terrorism in Jammu & Kashmir: Hagrama Mohilary
The Sentinel
February 16, 2019 Saturday


Copyright 2019 Omega Printers & Publishers Pvt Ltd, distributed by Contify.com All Rights Reserved
Length: 610 words
Body


It's time to be aggressive; Government of India will have to allow Indian Soldiers to act aggressively to counter terrorism in Jammu & Kashmir, claims Hagrama Mohilary

Tamulpur/Guwahati: Bodoland Territorial Council (BTC) chief Hagrama Mohilary today said that he is ready to send 500 Bodo youths in the battleground to fight against Pakistani terrorists in Jammu and Kashmir.

Speaking to the media in Tamulpur, the Bodoland People's Front (BPF) supremo, Mohilary also mentioned that the Bodo youths are capable to fight against all the extremists' organization operating from Pakistan. "If required, we are ready to send 500 Bodo youths to Kashmir specifically from BTC area," said BTC chief Hagrama Mohilary.

He also claimed that the Government will have to give full rights to the Bodo soldiers to operate openly against the terrorists; they can't be defensive. "We have many capable youths here; therefore, if necessary we will provide the appropriate training to train them for a war against Pakistan. They won't have to bother about salary, BTC will manage their salary," Hagrama added.

Also, condemning the Pulwama Terror Attack on Thursday, BPF supremo Hagrama Mohilary announced Rs 5 lakh ex-gratia to the martyred family members of CRPF jawan Maneshwar Basumatary today.

Hagrama also stated that the Indian Government will surely take revenge on the Pulwama Terror Attack upon the 49 CRPF jawan, but, the Government will have to allow the Security forces to opt for an aggressive attitude, Hagrama suggested.

Earlier, on Friday, nephew of Martyred CRPF jawan Maneshwar Basumatary, Kamal Bodo appealed the Prime Minister of India Narendra Modi and Home Minister Rajnath Singh to take stern action against the terrorist groups who are repeatedly engaged in such kind of cowardly act against our nation.

Speaking to The Sentinel Digital, Bodo said, "The central government had earlier promised that the issue of counter-terrorism in the nation by Pakistan would be solved but till date, no such problems have been solved. I appealed to the government to take necessary steps against this attack so that life of the martyred jawans doesn't go in vain," said the nephew Kamal Boro.

Meanwhile, strongly protesting against terrorism, All Bodo Students' Union (ABSU), Kokrajhar district committee brought out a candlelight rally at Kokrajhar town on Friday evening to express solidarity with the 49 CRPF jawans who were killed in the terrorist attack at Pulwama in J&K on February 14 that took the life of a jawan Maneswar Basumatary from Kalbari of Baksa district of BTC. One minute condolence was also held for the souls of the martyrs. The candlelight rally started from Bodofa Children Park to Pragati Bhavan via Jwhwlao Dwimalu Road. The activists shouted slogans against the terrorists.

Talking to reporters in the rally, former Rajya Sabha MP Urkhao Gwra Brahma said the Bodos stood united against the anti-national and anti-India elements. "Our heart and solidarity go to the brave soldiers who became martyrs in the terrorist attack and to the bereaved family of Maneswar Basumatary of Baksa district who belongs to Bodo community," he said adding that the ABSU has been giving its voice against terrorism. Brahma said the Bodos extended its unity and solidarity during Kargil war and suspended its movement for separate State and today also the Bodos stand united against evil forces who are operating against the country. He also said the Bodos will stand for the country during an emergency and critical time. On the other hand, the ABMSU also brought out a candlelight rally at Kokrajhar that started from Children Park near DC office extending solidarity.

Load-Date: February 16, 2019


End of Document