We can run from Iraq, but never hide from terror;
America is making a tremendous sacrifice there, but our commitment is necessary.
Portland Press Herald (Maine)
June 30, 2005 Thursday, FINAL Edition


Copyright 2005 Blethen Maine Newspapers, Inc.
Section: EDITORIAL; Pg. A10
Length: 414 words
Body

In his speech about Iraq on Tuesday, President Bush again avoided a timetable for withdrawal of American troops. Critics continue to seize on that, especially now that domestic support for the war is dwindling and the death toll of American soldiers passes 1,700.
There are voices in the United States and around the world calling for a speedy - some say immediate - withdrawal from Iraq. Concern for more loss of American lives is justifiable. The president, however, correctly insists that "we have made progress, but we have a lot more work to do." The president is right as well in arguing that we are waging a war to both assist democracy and to combat terrorism.
Critics calling for the speedy departure of U.S. forces should consider offering their prognosis on the future of Iraq if the U.S. were, in Bush's phrasing, to "stand down" before Iraq is fully capable of "standing up."
The fight against terrorism is a global one, and the U.S. is making one stand in Iraq. Would a speedy departure placate anti-American sentiments among terrorists? Would insurgents declare "mission accomplished" and turn their weapons into plowshares?
Absolutely not. In Iraq, the danger of an explosion into full-fledged civil war is real. Without our presence, any Iraqi perceived as pro-American would be targeted by militants who have demonstrated savagery that is off the scale of comprehension.
Terror activity elsewhere in the world might die down for a time, but insurgents would likely use an Iraqi civil war as an opportunity for organization and growth, digging roots that may never be eradicated.
We know that terror organizations, especially al-Qaida, are capable of enlisting new members and employing organizational strategies. A speedy U.S. withdrawal before Iraq can "stand up" would simply be an acquiescence - a surrender - that would give rise to a more powerful global threat of terror.
As for the fight to assist democracy and establish liberty in Iraq - it is real, and honorable. In January, a vast majority of Iraqis turned out to vote for a provisional government comprising their own people. Those votes were recorded despite daunting threats to individual lives and families. The boost of hope and support felt here in the U.S. has since abated, as factional disputes have muddied Iraq's march toward self-government.
We should not, however, see this as a signal to depart prematurely. Terrorism is global, and no matter how quickly we run, there is no place on earth to hide.

Load-Date: June 30, 2005


End of Document