WE CAN'T OVERLOOK THE THREAT OF ISLAMIC TERRORISM
St. Petersburg Times (Florida)
September 20, 2007 Thursday
0 South Pinellas Edition


Copyright 2007 Times Publishing Company All Rights Reserved
Section: NATIONAL; Pg. 12A
Length: 1338 words
Body


Time has come to end Bush's failed Iraq war - Sept. 16, editorial
Your editorial fails to place the Iraq war within the perspective of the worldwide war against Islamic jihadists; fails to provide the accurate historical data which preceded the commitment of combat troops there; fails to discuss the consequences of a withdrawal before the defeat of al-Qaida; and fails to provide a view toward an alternative strategy by which to achieve victory. The essence of the editorial is premised on the defeat of America and the victory of Islamic terrorism.
In the final analysis, the war against terrorism will be resolved in favor of the side with the most enduring resolve, conviction and willpower, not only in Iraq but throughout the world, including operations against covert terrorists here in our country.
The politicians, some of whom are presidential candidates, do not inspire willpower and resolve. They blow with the wind. After 9/11, when the bands were playing and the flags were flying, they were in favor of military action in Afghanistan and Iraq. Now they view the present public discontent as an opportunity to be exploited for political gain without regard for the long-term consequences.
The dedication and willpower of the terrorists should not be ignored, but your editorial does not discuss this aspect of the threat against this country. Instead you join in the excoriation of President Bush because of his determination to defeat these terrorists. In this political climate, it is doubtful that any course of action that he undertakes would meet the approval of certain factions who seem more interested in discrediting him than in destroying the terrorists.
Jack B. McPherson, New Port Richey
Misplaced emphasis
The discussion regarding ending the war in Iraq emphasizes the wrong priority. We should de-emphasize our presence in Iraq and focus on ending worldwide terrorism. A compromise in strategy and actual troop deployment must refocus our policy, strategy and tactical deployment of our troops.
To say that by fighting in Iraq we are keeping terrorism off our shores is just plain wishful thinking with a large dose of patriotic flag-waving.
I support our troops to carry out the mission they are assigned. However, ending global terrorism is the overarching mission, and what happens in Iraq is just a small piece of the mission.
Reducing forces in Iraq is our goal while still keeping the peace and supporting Iraqis' democratic ideals. But that should not be confused with our ultimate mission, along with coalition forces, to end global terrorism.
Focus on ending terrorism, on the real enemy. And reducing our Iraq commitments is the only way to get around the misguided debate about winning or losing in that country.
Sheldon A. Schwartz, St. Petersburg
Time has come to end Bush's failed Iraq war - Sept. 16, editorial
Reject the continuedoccupation of Iraq
You call this a war, but the war ended four years ago when the Iraqi army was routed. No weapons of mass destruction were found, and it was clear that Iraq was no threat to the United States.
Since then, the United States has occupied Iraq for reasons that change regularly. Nearly 3,800 U.S. soldiers have been killed so far, with many thousands more wounded and millions of Iraqis killed, wounded or displaced. U.S. soldiers are killed for the simple reason that they are occupying a foreign country against the will of the occupied. A large majority of Iraqis want the United States out.
Yet your editorial concedes that U.S. forces will be in Iraq even after Bush leaves office. Why?
You ignore the fact that Congress can end this occupation by merely denying funds, and only a simple majority in the House is required.
Your editorial is disingenuous. You must know that the neocon crazies are itching to get the United States into conflict with Iran and they need the Iraqi occupation to continue for that to happen. You must know that is a very real danger - so why are you accepting the continuing occupation instead of speaking against it?
Ron Cantrell, Palm Harbor
Hang tough
Gen. David Petraeus has command of my youngest son, one of my prized blessings. If I could e-mail Petraeus, I would say: Hang in there, General. Stay tough, complete the job, and God bless you.
He walks around among the insurgents that are blowing up women and children on a daily basis. He was not intimidated by a bunch of white-flag-waving Democrats.
Lynn O'Keefe, Largo
Didn't we win ?
Our president says that we can't bring the troops home until we have won the war.
President Bush took us to war because Iraq supposedly had weapons of mass destruction. We waged war and found none. So, didn't we win?
President Bush said that we must get rid of the Iraqi leader, Saddam Hussein. We found him in a hole in the ground, he was tried and then hanged. So, didn't we win?
President Bush said we must bring democracy to Iraq. Then they had an election and chose a leader. So, didn't we win again?
Now we are still there with religious factions blowing each other up as well as our troops. This could go on forever. Why should we stay there for that?
The war we are losing is finding Osama bin Laden and bringing him to justice along with destroying his terrorist camps. I would be in favor of that.
Bob Cooper, Seminole
Cheney brings his message to MacDill - Sept. 15, story
The two Cheneys
The Dick Cheney who spoke on Iraq at MacDill Air Force Base certainly sounds different from the Dick Cheney who spoke on Iraq when he served as defense secretary for George W. Bush's father.
That Dick Cheney cogently asked, "How many casualties should the United States accept in that effort to try to create clarity and stability in a situation that is inherently unstable?" That Dick Cheney asserted that "it would have been a mistake for us to get bogged down in the quagmire inside Iraq."
The Dick Cheney who spoke on Friday continued to claim that everything changed after 9/11, apparently including his ability to heed his own advice, much to the benefit of corporations like Halliburton.
That Dick Cheney asserted that the United States has the right to defend itself, but what he failed to mention is what most rational people now understand: that Iraq was not responsible for the 9/11 attacks. The con job continues, and sadly, so will the dying, maiming, spending and war profiteering.
Gerard Franklin, St. Petersburg
U.N. racism expert warns of "Islamophobia" - Sept. 15, story
Reality is missing
When I read that United Nations racism expert Doudou Diene called the portrayal of Islam in the West a major threat to world peace, I was astounded that it was not a satirical article.
Is Diene aware that the 19 hijackers who murdered nearly 3,000 innocent Americans on 09/11/01 were all Muslims? Moreover, is Diene aware of the countless tentative missions of the Islamic terrorists that have been thwarted by America and its allies within the last few years?
Doudou Diene needs a reality check. His absurd claim is an insult to the countless thousands who have been murdered at the hands of intolerant Islamic facists. Perhaps he has forgotten those who suffered on 09/11/2001, but I have not.
Thomas W. Cunningham Jr., St. Petersburg
Honor their service
Friday is National POW-MIA Recognition Day. Until July 18, 1979, no commemoration was held to honor America's POW-MIAs, those returned and those still missing and unaccounted for from all of our nation's wars. As a result of action taken by Congress and President Ronald Reagan, our POW-MIAs were officially recognized.
The focus of POW-MIA Recognition Day is to ensure that America remembers its responsibility to stand behind those who serve our nation and do everything possible to account for those who do not return.
Please take a moment of your time on Friday to remember our servicemen and women, those who served in the past and those who continue to serve. For our POW-MIAs who are unaccounted for and never returned: Honor their service ... fulfill their trust.
Sid Damsgard, commander, Dunedin Memorial American Legion Post 275, Dunedin

Load-Date: September 20, 2007


End of Document