We can't lose focus in war on terrorism
LANCASTER NEW ERA (LANCASTER, PA.)
April 22, 2002, Monday


Copyright 2002 Lancaster Newspapers, Inc.
Section: COMMENTARY,; EDITORIALS
Length: 809 words
Body


We notice unmistakable signs that the war on terrorism is breaking down just over seven months after Sept. 11.
'Polls show that a declining percentage of Americans believes another terrorist attack is imminent. Many homeowners have removed the flags that were practically omnipresent in the weeks following Sept. 11. They seem to have let down their guard along with the flags.
#WAR.BRU0A22I#
'Members of Lancaster County's Green Party demonstrated with other peace activists Saturday in Washington. They said the attacks on Washington and New York last September were criminal acts, not acts of war, and should be prosecuted as such.
'Criticism of Israel's military attack on Palestinian militants who have been killing Israeli civilians is increasing, not only in the Arab world but in the United States and Europe. Meanwhile, support for Arab suicide "martyrs" is rising.
The militant Muslims who have declared war on the United States, Israel and the rest of the democratic world take heart in all these signs. They understand that Americans and Europeans, especially, have short attention spans. They are waiting for this drift to continue.
Then they will strike again.
This is not speculation. The terrorists will strike again, against the United States and Israel and other non-Moslem countries, just as certainly as the sun will rise on Tuesday morning. That is the sole purpose of their existence.
------
A week and a half after Sept. 11, President Bush recognized that this war on terrorism would take years and would require steadfast resolve. In an address to Congress, he said, memorably, "I will not rest, I will not relent in waging this struggle for the freedom and security of the American people."
In an April 20 column, Cal Thomas wondered if Bush has lost some of the good-vs.-evil focus he projected so strongly last autumn.  The president may indeed have reduced his anti-terrorist fervor somewhat in light of the complexities of the Israeli-Palestinian crisis, but Americans as a group seem to be losing focus far faster.
Several polls have confirmed that less than half of Americans now think a second terrorist strike is likely in this country, whereas an overwhelming majority expected another hit last fall.
Popular opinion does not seem to be affecting the way the government is prosecuting the war on terrorism abroad or working to protect Americans at home -- yet. But if the people as a whole lose interest in this conflict, politicians, being creatures of public opinion, will take notice and act accordingly.
That could be disastrous. Osama bin Laden, dead or alive, remains an inspiration to thousands of Muslim militants. His terrorist network, no matter how fragmented, remains as dangerous as the suicide training organizations in Palestine.
Peace protesters have every right to suggest that making war on terrorism is the wrong approach, but then they also have a responsibility to suggest a better way. Branding the likes of al-Qaida and Hamas mere "criminals" does not seem a responsible alternative.
Al-Qaida, Hamas and other militant Muslim terror organizations have declared war on the United States and Israel. To react to those declarations by branding the declarers "criminals" seems at best wishful thinking and at worst suicidal.
Peace is not an option for militant Arabs. Deprived of the fruits of civilization and democracy by despotic rulers and their own unproductive anti-Western hatred, militant Muslims are determined to slaughter the other side until they win.
And they are willing to take all the time in the world to obtain their objective.
The three weeks that the Israeli army has spent rooting out terrorists in the West Bank have made the world fret, but those weeks are but a moment to the militants who are preparing new suicide attacks on Israeli civilians. The time line for their campaign strategy runs to years and decades.
The criticism of Israel's defensive invasion of Palestine plays to the militants' game plan. Now they can both kill Israeli civilians and expect justification for doing so. The poor Palestinians, say their defenders, have no other way to fight back.
As we have said in this space many times, there is no moral equivalence between the Israeli army's targeted attacks on Palestinian militants and the deliberate murder of Israeli civilians by Arab suicide bombers.
Neither is there any equivalence between what the maniacal jet hijackers did to 3,000 American civilians on Sept. 11 and America's justified prosecution of a full-scale war on those who committed those murders and who want to commit more.
In his speech to Congress last September, President Bush said the war on terrorism is civilization's critical fight against chaos. If we lose that thought now, or at any time before defeating the enemy, we imperil our future and the future of our children and of our children's children.

Load-Date: April 23, 2002


End of Document