We can always be better prepared
Charleston Gazette (West Virginia)
September 7, 2011, Wednesday


Copyright 2011 Charleston Newspapers
Section: EDITORIAL; Pg. P4A
Length: 904 words
Byline: Jeff Harvey
Body


A decade ago our world changed forever. The terrorist attacks in New York, Washington, D.C., and on a flight that ended with a crashed airplane in southwestern Pennsylvania - so shocking and horrifying that they seemed almost beyond belief - forced change upon us. Socially, politically, professionally and personally, we were forced to examine our way of life and, if necessary, make adjustments.
An especially hot spotlight fell on our governmental leaders and agencies - and they reacted with measures we live with today. When traveling, we now allow two hours for airport security. Upon entering most government and many private buildings, we face added layers of security. Even large-scale sports events get more police and EMS attention than ever before.
Some of this is comforting. Other aspects of the heightened security, to many people, are merely annoying. But one thing we've learned during the past decade is that we're never going back to life as it existed before 9/11. Preparation for disaster is now near the top of our list of national, regional and local priorities.
That being the case, it is the responsibility of our elected officials and the people that head our security and first-responding agencies to continue to try to get things right. What we can legitimately ask as a society is that our leaders try to give us comforting and common-sense levels of functional security.
Our governmental bodies, for the most part, have adapted - from Congress and state legislators, down to the smallest counties and municipalities. And now, as lawmakers debate future levels of local homeland security and emergency preparedness funding, we should raise two obvious questions: Are we spending homeland security money the way it should be spent? Are our cities and towns and counties more prepared for disaster than they were 10 years ago?
The answer is a glass half-full. Some will simply point to the billions of dollars spent in the past decade and say, "Yes, we have made this an economic priority, so surely we are better off than we were." And they would be right; across the board, our nation is more prepared.
What the public won't hear, though, is that being more prepared still only means that we are marginally prepared. Why? The homeland security funding strategy has, to this point, been too rigid and constrictive. With the addition of a little common sense, we could be more prepared for all hazards - from terrorism to floods to power outages to snowstorms.
Consider this. Rural counties throughout West Virginia could receive a homeland security grant for $10,000 for "terrorism risk assessment." But counties receiving such a grant would not be allowed to study any other type of risk while utilizing the grant funding.
As is often the case, these counties will find that they host perhaps two or three potential small, but legitimate, terrorist targets. Identifying such spots is appropriate. But because these targets are small, officials often don't need $10,000 to adequately describe the impacts if their targets are attacked. The counties, though, receive a penalty and a cut in future funding if the entire grant award is not used. Spend it or lose it. So they spend it.
Many of our counties suffer flash flooding every year. County leaders don't know exactly where storm drains will back up or how many houses and businesses will be ruined because of a substantial rainfall. So why could a community facing this problem not receive a grant for a risk assessment "that must include terrorism" rather than a terrorism-only assessment? Or why couldn't the small county get a less substantial grant for terrorism, allowing the Department of Homeland Security to award a city such as Charleston additional funds to better describe its terrorism risk? Right now the funding formula prohibits that. It can be argued, therefore, that our local leaders can only marginally prepare.
State and federal governments have created "eligibility criteria" to ensure that public dollars are not wasted. But how responsibly are we spending public dollars when the Department of Homeland Security correctly recommends an "all-hazards approach" to emergency preparedness yet restricts funding for the ever-present hazard of flooding? Homeland Security correctly advocates preparedness at the lowest jurisdictional level possible, but threats aren't always the work of terrorists. Mother Nature can be awfully threatening.
A new metric should require communities to have updated emergency preparedness audits in place as a prerequisite for any type of funding. The audit should realistically identify risks and state how prepared the community is to respond to them - including weaknesses and what it would take to eliminate those weaknesses.
The federal government could then award funding from a variety of programs based on proof that the money will better prepare the community for disaster. Perhaps a small county would get a smaller grant for terrorism, but because its audit says it is at risk to flash flooding, it gets another grant to address that risk. It makes sense to give our cities and local communities the funds and the flexibility to get the job done.
So are we more prepared than we were 10 years ago? Yes. But that doesn't mean we shouldn't get smarter.
Harvey is owner and project manager for JHC Consulting of Buckhannon, which specializes in community-based risk assessment
and emergency planning.

Load-Date: September 7, 2011


End of Document