We don't think that MGM can be found liable
USA TODAY
July 23, 2018 Monday
FINAL EDITION


Copyright 2018 Gannett Company, Inc. All Rights Reserved
Section: NEWS; Pg. 7A
Length: 303 words
Byline: Debra DeShong
Body


The recent filing for declaratory relief by MGM Resorts International was made under the Support Anti-terrorism by Fostering Effective Technologies Act of 2002.
This filing under the SAFETY Act will not deny any victim from their rights to a hearing in court and to a determinative outcome in their case.
All we are doing, in effect, is asking that these issues be decided in federal court. The assertion that this action would deny victims their day in court is not only inaccurate, but may confuse victims of their rights under law.
MGM believes that the SAFETY Act filing will ensure claims are properly resolved in federal court quickly, fairly and efficiently. In accordance with the SAFETY Act, we do not believe MGM can be found liable for the tragic and unforeseeable events of Oct. 1.
In any event, Congress has made clear that litigation arising from an event at which such services were provided is a matter of national interest and should be resolved in the national court system.
We believe that the law permits liability in appropriate cases only as to Contemporary Services Corporation (CSC), our longtime security vendor that provided security for the concert, whose services have been certified by the Department of Homeland Security.
CSC is required to carry (and does carry) liability insurance of $25 million, which would be used to pay successful third-party claims. Victims would also be entitled to receive funds from a number of victim assistance programs that are designated specifically for the purpose of assisting victims of mass violence and terrorism.
MGM's priority of bringing a resolution to the victims and their families has not changed, and we remain steadfast in reaching a conclusion.
Debra DeShong is senior vice president of global corporate communications for MGM Resorts International. 

Load-Date: July 23, 2018


End of Document