We have opened the floodgates for terrorism
SUNDAY NEWS (LANCASTER, PA.)
August 30, 1998, Sunday


Copyright 1998 Lancaster Newspapers, Inc.
Section: PERSPECTIVE,; LETTERS
Length: 317 words
Body


April 4 1967, at New York's Riverside Church, exactly one year before he was shot and killed, Dr. Martin Luther King Jr. said, "Somehow this madness must cease." He was speaking about the Vietnam War. "We must stop now. I speak as a child of God and brother to the suffering poor of Vietnam. I speak for those whose land is being laid waste, whose homes are being destroyed, whose culture is being subverted." He spoke as a pacifist and as a U.S. citizen.
#ADLTRNEW.A34#
More than 30 years later these words come to me as a reaction to our current situation. The United States of America stands for the biggest and best of anything: our cars, our lifestyle, even our economy. And as the biggest we must be prepared to defend our place at the top. Just like the neighborhood bullies of my youth, we must "take all comers" if we are to retain our station. Our price for being at the top is eternal vigilance.
But, as we accepted our reign, we also became lazy, and just a few days ago we were stung. Twin terrorist bombings of our embassies in Kenya and Tanzania challenged our place. And as anyone knows, there are only two responses: Ignore it or fight back. We chose to strike back and thereby legitimize the challenge presented to us by an infinitely weaker foe.
I believe this is the wrong choice. Once a bully shows the weakness of responding in anger, many more will rise to challenge him. Have we just opened a floodgate for terrorism? I believe we should have taken this lesson and learned that the price for living at the top is paid in blood and bodies, mourned our great loss, and fortified ourselves against future aggressors.
So while last Monday I mourned for the dead and wounded in Kenya and Tanzania, now I mourn the madness in which we partake. Now I fear we have opened Pandora's box and will see a resulting rise in terrorism. Indeed, "Somehow this madness must cease." Robert Martin Lancaster

Load-Date: October 14, 1999


End of Document