We Learned the Wrong Lessons in Vietnam;
Arab-American Danger
The New York Times
January 20, 1991, Sunday, Late Edition - Final


Copyright 1991 The New York Times Company
Distribution: Editorial Desk
Section: Section 4;; Section 4; Page 18; Column 6; Editorial Desk; Column 6;; Letter
Length: 287 words
Body


To the Editor:
You report the alarming decision by the Federal Bureau of Investigation to interview as many as 200 Arab-Americans a week about possible terrorist activity (news article, Jan. 8). This action seems to me, as an American of Japanese ancestry, similar to developments that led to the tragedy of the Japanese-American internment in 1942. It is all the more ominous in light of a draft paper by the Immigration and Naturalization Service, leaked a couple of years ago, that proposed rounding up and interning Arab-Americans in the event of a national emergency.
The F.B.I. is casting unwarranted suspicion on Arab-American business and community leaders who have nothing to do with terrorism. Law enforcement officials around the country have not found any evidence linking any Arab-American to terrorist activity.
Arab-American organizations have reported a growing number of threats and violent acts against Arab-Americans since Iraq's Aug. 3 invasion of Kuwait. Instead of targeting Arab-Americans, the F.B.I. should be investigating those who have been victims in the many unprovoked attacks against Arab-Americans around the country. A few years ago, Alex Odeh was killed when a bomb exploded in the Los Angeles office of the Arab-American organization of which he was an officer, yet the terrorists behind that crime have never been brought to justice.
F.B.I. and Justice Department officials are sworn to uphold and defend the Constitution and the laws of the land, including civil rights laws. They should not use the threat of terrorism or war as a justification to single out a group based on ancestry, and then violate or threaten to violate their fundamental rights.
 
JOHN OTA
Oakland, Calif., Jan. 15, 1991

Load-Date: January 20, 1991


End of Document