We need it to help keep America safe It has proved a valuable tool in protecting the nation since 9/11. 
St. Louis Post-Dispatch (Missouri)
June 27, 2005 Monday
FIVE STAR LIFT EDITION


Copyright 2005 St. Louis Post-Dispatch, Inc.
Section: EDITORIAL; Pg. B7
Length: 472 words
Byline: By JAMES G. MARTIN
Body


There clearly is room for disagreement as to where the line should be drawn in balancing the interests of our national security and our civil liberties. Therefore, I support debate about the Patriot Act as Congress considers its renewal. However, a recent Post-Dispatch editorial attacking Section 215 of the act reflects a significant misunderstanding of the facts.
Although it often is referred to as "the library provision," Section 215 never uses the word "library." Rather, it authorizes the FBI to seek, as part of an international terrorism investigation, a court order requiring the production of "any tangible things." In criminal investigations, grand juries have been issuing subpoenas for such items for years. Section 215 simply establishes a way for federal authorities to obtain comparable materials in national security investigations.
It is true that "any tangible things" may include library records. Yet the government never has used the act for that purpose. In criminal investigations, however, library records sometimes have proved vital.
For example, the library records of Theodore Kaczynski -- the multiple murderer known as the Unabomber -- allowed investigators to match quotations in his threatening letters to books he had checked out in Montana. Discovering such evidence was good police work, not an invasion of civil liberties.
Similarly, obtaining library records can help prevent terrorist actions. Evidence gathered since the attacks of Sept. 11, 2001, indicates that the hijackers had used libraries in Delray Beach, Fla., and at a New Jersey state college library in carrying out their plot.
Such information could be vitally important to an international terrorism investigation. Without the Patriot Act, we can use grand jury subpoenas and search warrants to gather evidence, including library records, after terrorists blow up a building. But by then, it's too late.
In fighting international terrorism, we need to be able to gather evidence before a tragic event occurs, not after. Section 215 gives the FBI the ability to seek a court order to gather such evidence.
The threat of another terrorist attack within our borders is very real. There are significant numbers of people on U.S. soil who want to harm our country. We must never let them succeed again. To do that, we must be vigilant. We must continue to pursue terrorists with every legal means available.
Sixteen provisions of the Patriot Act are up for reauthorization. For those of us working in the war against terror and the fight against crime, the act is critical to helping intelligence and law enforcement agencies work together effectively, efficiently and constitutionally. We need the tools of the Patriot Act as we work to keep our nation safe from attack.
---
James G. Martin is U.S. attorney for the Eastern District of Missouri.

Notes

 PATRIOT ACT COMMENTARY - A FORUM FOR OTHER VOICES, IDEAS AND OPINIONS  

Graphic

 
PHOTO
 PHOTO - James G. Martin is U.S. attorney for the Eastern District of Missouri. 

Load-Date: June 28, 2005


End of Document