We Need an International Court on Terrorism;
U.S. and Israel Agree
The New York Times
August 27, 1989, Sunday, Late Edition - Final


Copyright 1989 The New York Times Company
Section: Section 4; Page 18, Column 6; Editorial Desk; Letter
Length: 287 words
Body


To the Editor:
James S. Mellett writes (letter, Aug. 18): ''More than 200,000 Iranian Jews are trapped in Iran.'' Before the overthrow of the Shah in 1979, the Jewish population numbered some 80,000.
Since the rise of the Islamic republic, the majority have emigrated. Estimates of the Jewish population range from 22,000 (American Jewish Year Book, 1989) to more than 30,000, given by Iranian Jewish sources.
While there are some restrictions on travel, several thousand Iranian Jews leave the country each year. I recently met in New York two young Iranian Jewish men, who had been issued passports to come to the United States after completing their army service. With the ending of the Iraq-Iran war, it is hoped that travel and emigration will be further eased. Iranian Jews are not ''trapped'' in the way the Jews of Yemen or Syria are.
As erroneous as Mr. Mellett's figures is his conclusion that because Israel is naturally concerned about the fate of Jews in Iran, Israeli foreign policy on Iran ''may be getting in the way of our foreign policy.'' Jerusalem and Washington agree that Iran is a strategically vital country, and it is in our common interest to encourage the more moderate, pragmatic elements in Iran, who are prepared to deal with the West, and to weaken the power of the radical Islamic elements, like the Iranian Revolutionary Guards, who aid militant Shiite groups in Lebanon, which have kidnapped and killed Americans and Jews.
The United States and Israel are both threatened by the same forces of fanaticism and extremism, who would benefit most from any widening rift between Washington and Jerusalem.
 
GEORGE E. GRUEN
Director, Middle East Affairs
American Jewish Committee
  New York, Aug. 18, 1989


End of Document