We Need an International Court on Terrorism
The New York Times
August 27, 1989, Sunday, Late Edition - Final


Copyright 1989 The New York Times Company
Section: Section 4; Page 18, Column 4; Editorial Desk; Letter
Length: 329 words
Body


To the Editor:
The State Department and the Soviet Foreign Ministry are to be commended for negotiating an agreement to accept the binding arbitration of the World Court in disputes over interpretation of seven treaties dealing with international terrorism and drug trafficking (news story, Aug. 7). I would urge the State Department to go a step further and support House Concurrent Resolution 66, which calls on President Bush to explore with other nations a multinational conference to set up an international criminal court for international terrorism and drug trafficking.
The World Court has jurisdiction only over nations. It cannot try individuals accused of terrorism or drug trafficking. Nor is extradition of an accused terrorist or drug trafficker to the victim's state for trial satisfactory. West Germany didn't extradite Mohammed Ali Hamadei (who murdered the Navy diver Robert Dean Stethem in Beirut in a 1985 hijacking). It feared undermining diplomatic relations with Arab states. West German authorities tried him in their own country, but feared retaliation against their own citizens.
A better answer is a special international criminal court. The Nuremburg trials are a precedent for holding individuals accountable to the world community for crimes against humanity. It's time we recognized international terrorism and drug trafficking as such crimes.
Then there would be a third option beyond extradition to a victim's state or any one country's trying such individuals: trial by a jury of international judges chosen by the General Assembly and the Security Council of the United Nations (as judges of the World Court are chosen). The American Bar Association proposed such a court in 1978, but the State Department did not act. In his September 1987 article on the United Nations, Mikhail S. Gorbachev also endorsed the idea of an international tribunal for terrorism.
 
WALTER HOFFMANN
Executive Director
World Federalist Association
  Washington, Aug. 9, 1989


End of Document