Weakened Al Qaeda increases threats to civilian targets
Business Insurance
October 17, 2005


Copyright 2005 Crain Communications All Rights Reserved
Section: NEWS; Pg. 21
Length: 711 words
Byline: MARK A. HOFMANN
Body


WASHINGTON-Al Qaeda has been weakened, which may ironically put civilian targets at a greater risk of terrorist attacks, according to a terrorism expert.
In fact, because of the damage inflicted upon it, Al Qaeda is becoming more ``a movement of movements,'' said Robert Reville, director of the RAND Institute for Civil Justice and co-director of the RAND Center for Terrorism Risk Management Policy in Santa Monica, Calif. Smaller groups will seek easier targets, he said.
Mr. Reville offered his observation during a Capitol Hill symposium on terrorism risk insurance held earlier this month. During the symposium, the RAND terrorism center joined the Center for Risk & Economic Analysis of Terrorism Events at the University of Southern California in Los Angeles and the Wharton Risk Management & Decision Processes Center at the University of Pennsylvania in Philadelphia in proposing six principles to guide public policy regarding the future of terrorism insurance.
The principles were unveiled during the Capitol Hill symposium on terrorism risk insurance earlier this month. The symposium came against the backdrop of the looming expiration of the Terrorism Risk Insurance Act, which provides a governmental financial backstop for insurers paying losses from future catastrophic terrorist attacks. The Bush administration does not support the extension of TRIA, which is slated to sunset on Dec. 31, unless the program undergoes significant revisions, most notably requiring the private insurance market to assume a greater amount of the risk.
A `dynamic threat'
Mr. Reville's comments concerned two of the principles. One is that terrorism is a national security issue and that the public sector has a responsibility to make terrorism insurance widely available and to encourage its use. The other is that terrorism is a dynamic threat. ``The terrorists react to our actions and seek innovative ways to undermine our defenses. Public policy regarding terrorism insurance should evolve along with the threat,'' according to the statement outlining the principles.
Mr. Reville said that the weakening of Al Qaeda has resulted in a sort of ``franchising'' of terrorism. These locally autonomous groups make determining whether a terrorist attack was of foreign or domestic origin much more difficult. But he noted that TRIA makes a distinction between the two sources of terrorist attacks.
TRIA covers only foreign-originated attacks. That distinction could cause confusion in the wake of a future attack, he said.
Meanwhile, Mr. Reville pointed out that the strengthening of government targets against terrorist attacks may make civilian targets more attractive to terrorists, resulting in what he called a ``displacement of risk phenomenon.'' That could mean greater reliance on terrorist insurance, he said.
Other principles
Mr. Reville also noted that Al Qaeda is increasingly interested in attacking economic targets, such as financial institutions.
The principles, though general, drew criticism from a Bush administration official who said that they did not give adequate emphasis to the private sector's role in providing terrorism insurance.
The other four principles are:
* The likelihood of a terrorist attack should be considered when determining insurance pricing and coverage. Risk analysis can be useful in informing insurance pricing and purchasing decisions.
* A public policy that anticipates high rates of uninsured losses should not be tolerated unless there is acknowledgement that the public sector will respond with federal assistance after the attack.
* Loss distribution: The design of a terrorism insurance program should consider the distribution of losses after an attack among victims, insurers, all commercial policyholders and taxpayers.
* Mitigation measures: Public policy on terrorism insurance should encourage those at risk to adopt mitigation measures.
Douglas Holtz-Eakin, director of the Congressional Budget Office, criticized the principles as relying too much on the public sector. ``What's notable by its absence is the private sector,'' said Mr. Holtz-Eakin.
In addition to RAND, USC and Wharton, the Communications Institute of Pasadena, Calif., and the Washington-based publisher Congressional Quarterly sponsored the Oct. 7 event.

Load-Date: October 21, 2005


End of Document