WEAKENED ANTI-TERRORISM BILL OK'D; GINGRICH ENTREATY ENDS 2-DAY DEBATE
Wisconsin State Journal (Madison, WI)
March 15, 1996, Friday,
ALL EDITIONS


Copyright 1996 Madison Newspapers, Inc.
Section: Front,
Length: 556 words
Byline: DAVID HESS; KNIGHT-RIDDER NEWSPAPERS
Dateline: WASHINGTON
Body


A watered-down bill to combat terrorism passed the House on Thursday by a 229-191 vote after two days of contentious debate over the balance between protecting public safety and preserving civil liberties.
It took a dramatic, last-minute plea by House Speaker Newt Gingrich, R-Ga., to give the measure the final push it needed to pass.
''The challenge of a free society is to have a government that is strong enough to protect us from danger but carefully enough constrained to itself not be a danger,'' Gingrich said.
Gingrich sought to calm conservatives' concern that over-eager federal authorities might turn their sights on domestic militias and other groups that regard the government as the enemy.
Before passing the bill, which must go now to a conference with the Senate, the House stripped from it several provisions that would have beefed up the federal government's power to crack down on domestic and foreign terrorists.
A rare coalition of conservatives, gun enthusiasts and civil libertarians provided the votes to defang the legislation before it finally passed.
Many conservatives were afraid to give more power to the FBI, Treasury agents, immigration police and other federal authorities, citing what they called abuses of power during the 1993 siege of a 22)000 . 0000.00*22heavily armed religious cult in Waco, Texas, and a 1992 shootout at Ruby Ridge, Idaho.
Pro-gun members, backed by the National Rifle Association, objected to provisions that would have made it easier for federal authorities to arrest and convict gun dealers and owners who sold or traded weapons later used to commit crimes or terrorist acts.
And civil libertarians, prompted by the American Civil Liberties Union, opposed provisions that would have made it easier for federal authorities to use illegally obtained wiretap evidence in prosecutions and to obtain phone records without warrants.
They also objected to deporting suspected foreign terrorists with secret evidence not revealed to the suspects and permitting the attorney general and secretary of state to designate groups as terrorist.
Those items were removed from the bill in an amendment by Rep. Bob Barr, R-Ga.
The Senate's version of the bill, which passed by an 84-16 margin last summer, contains most of the stronger enforcement provisions stricken by the House. President Clinton indicated he favors the 22)000 . 0000.00*22Senate's version and said Thursday he hopes the conference committee will toughen up the compromise bill that finally reaches his desk.
The House bill still contains some major provisions to fight crime and discourage terrorism, including:
Authority to deport aliens convicted of crimes.
A ban on the import of nuclear materials that could be used to build weapons.
A requirement that identification markers, called ''taggants,'' be included in all plastic explosives made or imported into the United States.
Restitution payments to victims of federal crimes.
Authority for American citizens to sue for damages foreign countries designated as sponsors of terrorism.
Wisconsin votes
The House, by a 229-191 vote, Thursday passed a crime bill.
Voting for the bill were Republicans Steve Gunderson, Scott Klug, Thomas Petri, Toby Roth and F. James Sensenbrenner.
Voting against the bill were Democrats Thomas Barrett, Gerald Kleczka and David Obey, and Republican Mark Neumann.

Load-Date: March 16, 1996


End of Document