Web Winners / Web Winners By Reid Kanaley
 Philadelphia Inquirer
July 17, 2005 Sunday CITY-D EDITION


Copyright 2005 Philadelphia Newspapers, LLC  All Rights Reserved


Length: 289 words
Byline: By Reid Kanaley; Inquirer Columnist
Body


In the aftermath of the London bombings, we discovered Web sites following antiterror developments in Britain as well as on the world stage.
London attacks.
The BBC site on the London bombings has quick updates, survivors' diaries, amateur and BBC video, and British analysis.
http://news.bbc.co.uk/1/hi/in_depth/uk/2005/london_explosions 
London-ist.When we looked, this all-about-London blog was pointing out that the BBC edited out the word terrorist in its early reporting about the transit bombings. This as a matter of evenhanded style policy at "the Beeb."www.londonist.com 
Number 10.British Prime Minister Tony Blair's Web site, called 10 Downing Street, touts achievements of his government as well as its resolve to fight terrorism. Read daily news briefings and the history of the house on Downing Street in London, considered the prime minister's residence since Sir Robert Walpole, First Lord of the Treasury, moved there in the 1730s.www.pm.gov.uk 
United Nations.Read
about U.N. efforts to stop terrorism, including the text
of General Assembly resolutions against hostage-taking, for the suppression of nuclear terrorism, and for protection of human rights while countering terrorism. Click on Latest Developments for links to the latest statements issued by the Security Council and summaries of news briefings given by U.N. officials.
www.un.org/terrorism 
Rand Corp.The famous think tank maintains a Web page on its study of terrorism and homeland security. Many of its reports and analyses, such as one titled "Next Steps in the War on Terror," are offered for sale in print form, but for free as downloads.
www.rand.org/research_areas/ 
terrorism
Contact staff writer Reid Kanaley at 610-701-7637 or rkanaley@phillynews.com  

Load-Date: July 17, 2005


End of Document