Weighing response to terrorism threat
The Bismarck Tribune
October 9, 2016 Sunday


Copyright 2016 The Bismarck Tribune, a division of Lee Enterprises All Rights Reserved
Section: B; Pg. 4
Length: 989 words
Byline: EDWARD LOTTERMAN Bismarck Tribune
Body


Around the globe, we collectively substantiate the thoughts of the great 19th century Swiss military thinker Antoine-Henri Jomini.
If he, Osama bin Laden and Muhammed Atta were somehow looking back across the great divide to observe people filing into a collegiate football stadium near my home or waiting in airport security lines, Jomini probably would nod in agreement as the two terrorists exchanged high fives. Their 9/11 attack was a textbook example of a military principle he championed - "economy of force."
Every time a young couple with a baby has to distribute the contents of a diaper bag between their collective pockets to be allowed into a football game, or a woman has to clutch her tampons in her hands to get through the same entrance, it becomes clear that the attacks on Sept. 11, 2001, were the greatest "economy of force" military operation in the history of humanity. Never before had such a statistically small expenditure of lives and money inflicted so much tangible and intangible harm on an enemy.
Having just observed the 15th anniversary of the attacks, it is only human to focus on the deaths that day. The current tabulation is about 3,000 on the day itself and nearly that many claims for subsequent deaths have been filed, primarily among public safety members who contracted fatal cancers or respiratory problems. 
It is our efforts to restore security after the attacks that have imposed high economic costs. Of course, these decisions also are prompted by other incidents, such as the shoe and underwear plane bombers, the San Bernardino shootings this year and the 2013 Boston Marathon bombings.
The extra security measures at airports imposed in reaction to 9/11 affect about 900 million person-flights per year in the United States and many more in other countries. Estimating an hour extra for each, that time lost annually by travelers roughly equals that of 450,000 people working full-time for a year. If we added that many people to the unemployed, the national rate in September would have been over 5.1 percent instead of 4.9 percent. 
There also are the security checks on entering other facilities, including most major and some sports venues, concerts, theaters and shopping malls. There are the people who work for private security services, the additional metal detectors and scanners, the concrete barriers and the bomb-sniffing dogs. The economic costs we have chosen to impose on ourselves are enormous. And they outweigh the resources that went into the plane hijackings 15 years ago by a wider margin than in any other conceivable attack in history. 
Jomini's ideas refer to finding opportunities where a relatively small use of available military forces causes disproportionate damage to one's enemies' capabilities. The strategic purpose is to free other resources for a main attack. That really wasn't the case for the al-Qaida attacks. The 18 original hijackers were just out to strike a blow, though they did have delusions that their success would inspire countless multitudes to spontaneously rise up.
Groups such as al-Qaida and ISIS do not pose an existential threat to the government or economy of our country or of any other friendly democracy. But, despite hundreds of billions of dollars spent on security measures, it is still relatively easy for them to kill a few of us and thus frighten, anger and humiliate all of us.
So we surrender civil liberties to intelligence agencies and limit the size of purses women may carry into football games. Perhaps there is no alternative. We have not had any deaths in a terrorist incident in aviation since 9/11 itself. But that does not mean all the time and money spent on airport security is unneeded. If we returned to the measures in place 20 years ago, we might well suffer from more successful attacks.
That is an unwelcome reality of the new millennium. Warfare has become asymmetric in ways that often favor small decentralized groups. Organizations like ISIS do not yet have the resources to take over countries and hold them, but their actions can force us to expend enormous resources on security. Their threat can be suppressed, but not eliminated.
Are we then condemned to large expenditures forever? Perhaps. But we can also be more prudent in applying a rule of reason. Public officials need to be more willing to ask, "Is this metal detector really necessary?"
In 2004, I chanced to drive by a little Army Reserve Center in a rural county seat where I had served 25 years earlier. Nearly empty 28 days of the month, by 2004, it was surrounded by concrete barriers to keep vehicles distant from the building. Clearly, if a terrorist wanted to carry out an attack in that rural town, there are at least a dozen targets, including the Pizza Ranch and Walmart, that would be much more attractive. But someone in the Defense Department decided we needed barriers at every little military facility, regardless of objective risk.
Private sector decision makers need to be more judicious, too. Do stringent limits on purse or diaper-bag sizes really improve our security to a degree that outweighs the inconvenience imposed? Or are such measures just street theater, meant for show rather than substance? Or are they driven by fear of U.S. juries willingness to award multimillion dollar damages on thin reasons if some incident would occur?
Ignore nonsense about "winning the war on terror." There is no individual terrorist or organization that can or will surrender to us on the deck of the USS George Washington, the way the Japanese signed a surrender in Tokyo Bay. We are going to be in this situation for a long time. We can try to be reasonable and prudent in choosing security measures or we can whip ourselves into frenzies. Which of these we choose will affect what resources will be left to meet the other needs of our societies.
St. Paul economist and writer Edward Lotterman can be reached at bismarck@edlotterman.com

Load-Date: October 8, 2016


End of Document