WELL, NOW IT'S A WAR ON TERRORISM
Dayton Daily News (Ohio)
August 20, 2003 Wednesday CITY EDITION


Copyright 2003 Dayton Newspapers, Inc.
Section: EDITORIAL; Pg. A6
Length: 576 words
Body


Some opponents of this country in iraq have given up any pretense that they are interested in the well-being of Iraq.
That's the only interpretation to put on the blowing up of a pipeline that provides much of Baghdad's water, and the setting of a massive fire along an oil pipeline, and an attack on a prison that left 65 Iraqi casualties, but no American ones.
Until recently, postwar violence by anti-American forces had focused on Americans. Then there was an attack on the Jordanian Embassy; the idea in that case seemed to be to target foreigners who were seen as too friendly toward the United States.
Now, however, some attacks are directly upon Iraqis and their resources. Not all; just Tuesday there was an attack on the United Nations headquarters in Baghdad.
American authorities continue to say all these attacks are coming from partisans of the deposed Saddam Hussein. Other observers, however, suspect the perpetrators are religious extremists (perhaps from outside the country) who had no use for Saddam, but definitely do not want anything to happen in the Mideast that might look like a positive contribution by the United States.
After all, if this country leaves Iraq peaceful, democratic and prosperous, the cause of those who want fundamentalist governments everywhere is set back drama- tically.
The latest bombers would clearly like to keep Iraq permanently impoverished. They'd also like to incite violence, turning Iraqis against Iraqis, and Iraqis against the Americans. They welcome chaos, in which extremism sometimes flourishes.
Though the forces of evil might be turning their attention away from American troops, the Bush administration cannot be very happy. For it, chaos and prolonged turmoil in Iraq are unacceptable, politically and otherwise.
When the president decided to go into Iraq, he presented his decision as - above all else - part of the war on terrorism. All the talk about weapons of mass destruction resulted from concern that those weapons would be used in terrorist acts against the United States.
But the administration never sold much of the world on the notion that a war against Saddam Hussein was really a war on terrorism.
Now, however, if the events of the past week are not flukes, there does seem to be a war against terrorism at hand.
And the war could be terribly difficult. If sustained, it will involve all manner of security precautions that will irritate a population that is living a life full of awful irritations already.
It may also require more help from the outside than the Bush administration has been willing to ask for yet, and more ceding of responsibility to the United Nations. The latter might undercut the ability of the extremists to sell their activities as anti-American.
The Bush administration decided recently not to ask the United Nations to send troops to Iraq. But it didn't ballyhoo the decision. Administration insiders told reporters that the thinking was that the situation in Iraq wasn't bad enough to warrant that. They said the option was still open. The time to reconsider may come soon.
Ultimately, too, the Iraqi people must turn against the terrorists as one. The leaders of all the factions in Iraq must speak out, and must encourage people not to cooperate. The leaders of other Arab countries have to act the same way and must deploy their resources to seek out the terrorists, who are a threat to any government. Absent that kind of unity, there may be little hope.

Load-Date: August 21, 2003


End of Document