West Virginia U. Indian students weigh in on Mumbai terrorist attacks
University Wire
December 8, 2008 Monday


Copyright 2008 The Daily Athenaeum via U-Wire
Length: 465 words
Byline: By Ryan Hoffman, The Daily Athenaeum; SOURCE: West Virginia U.
Dateline: MORGANTOWN, W.Va. 
Body


While most West Virginia University students spent Thanksgiving break with their families, international students from India waited to hear from loved ones after the Nov. 26 terrorist attacks on Mumbai that killed more than 170 people.
Sawan Prabhu, a junior biology major and undergraduate representative for the WVU Indian Students Association, first heard of the attacks through news broadcasts the night of the attacks.
She and her friends from India were outraged as they followed the attacks on television.
"Luckily, all my relatives that live in Mumbai were safe, and everyone I talked to here at WVU was also grateful that their families were safe," Prabhu said.
According to CNN, Indian authorities believe the attackers were Pakistanis with ties to Lashkar-e-Tayyiba, an Islamic militant group in Pakistan.
Ravichand Raavi, president of the WVU ISA, said it is hard to tell who was responsible.
Both he and Prabhu believe the terrorists were at least operating under the shadow of Pakistan and other Islamic nations, but the Pakistani government is not necessarily to blame.
"There were fingers pointed everywhere, mostly at Pakistan, because there has been a long history of warfare between Pakistan and India," Prabhu said. "No one quite understood the premises of the attacks, and shootings seemed to be done at random with the general intent to kill foreigners."
Raavi spoke to relatives in India and said the recent attacks have left the Indian people feeling insecure about their lives and hindered the country's progress in terms of social stability.
"The terrorists feel they have an upper hand in the world by using violence," Raavi said. "They are told that violence leads to peace in the world. I think the only way to stop it is if countries come together."
WVU sociology and terrorism professor Larry Nichols said the attacks could have been perpetrated by radical Muslims in India as retaliation for India's 2003 riots where extremist Hindu groups killed more than 1,000 Muslims.
"Terrorists are usually quick to take responsibility for these kinds of attacks," Nichols said. "It's surprising that no one took credit for these attacks."
Ajay Nayak, a graduate student at studying biomedical sciences, spent his childhood in Mumbai, India.
He believes that the free nations of the world should do more to prevent such attacks.
"As of now, there are credible intelligence reports over the presence of terrorist camps in Pakistan," Nayak said. "So why are the nations of the world not managing to do something about this?"
Raavi said India would welcome moral support from western countries, but support alone will not stop terrorism.
"Terrorism will not end until the terrorists focus on how to achieve their objectives in non-violent ways," he said.
(C) 2008 The Daily Athenaeum via UWIRE

Load-Date: December 9, 2008


End of Document