Westchester Journal
The New York Times
November 8, 1981, Sunday, Late City Final Edition


Copyright 1981 The New York Times Company
Section: Section 11; Westchester; Page 3, Column 1; Weschester Weekly Desk
Length: 1648 words
Byline: By James Feron
Body


WESTCHESTER COUNTY spent $50,000 last week to help the Board of Elections improve the reporting of election results, but when it was all over early Wednesday morning, there were indications that more work was needed.
It had been hoped that the use of county computers would speed the process, so final results would be available by midnight or before.  But at 12:30 A.M., or three-and-one-half hours after the polls closed, only 52 percent of the results had been posted at Board of Elections headquarters.
Vincent Castaldo, the county's Administrator of Special Services who handled the first stages of the process, said it had been his first such experience, and that he had learned a lot. ''The first thing we noticed is the delay in reporting results.''
Westchester Journal column, by James Feron, notes attempt by county to improve reporting of election results still needs more work and local news
Election inspectors, who are local party persons, start the process by telephoning results to members of the League of Women Voters and other volunteers who staff 90 telephones in the County Office Building. ''But we noticed that by 10 o'clock,'' an hour after the polls closed, ''we had only 50 of 787 districts,'' Mr. Castaldo said.
In some cases, he said, inspectors were including absentee ballots. They are counted in the later official tally, but their inclusion election night only slows the process. Some inspectors were calling in the results of each voting machine, thus providing ''partial'' results and adding further confusion. Others familiar with the political process said some inspectors routinely call local candidates first, adding to the delay.
By 10 P.M., the calls were pouring in, swamping the nearly two dozen ''data entry'' clerks on the third floor. The tabulated results were run off every half hour or so and taken by courier to the Board of Elections a mile away. There they were posted, but only for the major races. The results of contests for mayor, supervisor, local council and town board were tabulated in the traditional way - ''by hand,'' as one official put it - at election headquarters.
More immediate results, reporters have learned, are available where candidates gather, although the tendency there is to release the most favorable figures first. Even so, the outcome of the White Plains and Yonkers mayoralty races were known at those locations an hour before they were posted at the Board of Elections.
It was also impossible to learn what portion of a County Legislator's district was represented by an incomplete return because the computer was releasing results on a countywide basis. Mr. Castaldo said that the 11-member Election Night Task Force would meet next week to reassess the new system.
Ann Jones wrote ''Women Who Kill,'' and just over a week ago, as a lecturer at Sarah Lawrence College, she defined them in simple terms. ''Women who kill,'' she said, ''are just like women who don't kill; they're just pushed farther.''
Miss Jones, whose talk in Reisinger Auditorium was sponsored by the school's Center for Continuing Education, covered the subject from Colonial times - when, she said, women were prosecuted ''with the greatest gusto'' - to the present.
Today, the typical woman who kills ''is a battered woman,'' she said. ''The figure quoted is 45 percent but I put it higher, perhaps 80 to 90 percent, with many not indicted because they kill in selfdefense.''
She cited statistics from the Federal Bureau of Investigation indicating, she said, that 50 percent of the women who live with men will be battered. There was a murmur in the audience of nearly 300, most of whom were women. ''Is that astonishing?'' she asked. ''It's cited as a reason for 25 percent of divorces.'' Three of four women who are killed, she added, are victims of husbands or lovers.
''The violence of women,'' she said, ''represents the inadequacies of the institutions they serve.'' Women have ''always been a peaceable lot, committing only 15 percent of homicides, and there are fewer today than there were in the 19th century, and fewer intentionally - they kill in a last-resort situation.''
The idea for her book emerged from earlier studies about women and ''the suicide model,'' Miss Jones said. ''We're programmed to become depressive and suicidal.''
Miss Jones began her studies with Lizzie Borden, ''who is the mother of us all, not Betty Friedan,'' she said to laughter. ''Lizzie did take a hatchet to her stepmother and father, and an hour elapsed between the two. She was as guilty as guilty could be.'' But she was acquitted - ''as a poor orphan.''
''That she was a self-made orphan didn't seem to matter,'' Miss Jones observed. ''Lizzie, considered a poor 'girl' - she was 32 years old - was acquitted because of social and sexist prejudices. All three judges had daughters her age.''
According to Miss Jones, ''chivalry protected ladies - not working women or women of color -and it protected them from jobs and education, and also from accountability to the law.''
The author spent ''five years in a little room in the New York Public Library'' researching her book, which now has an ''afterword'' on the case of Jean S. Harris, the Madeira School headmistress who was convicted earlier this year of murdering Dr. Herman Tarnower, her former companion and lover.
The crime ''was completely atypical of women,'' Miss Jones said.  ''Women have killed out of jealousy, but not many.'' The case, as presented in the press, ''served to reassure us that Mrs. Harris, although gifted and educated, could not live without her man,'' she said.
Explaining that she did not ''condone homicide, I just try to understand it,'' Miss Jones conceded that the subject of her book ''tends to make people walk away from me in the middle of conversations.''
A week after the $1.6 million Brink's armored-car robbery and the shootings in Rockland County involving former members of political underground groups, a Scarsdale adult-school class was listening to a lecture on terrorism. Police investigators, meanwhile, were seeking evidence of what they now saw as a possible radical conspiracy. The lecturer offered another point of view on whether such a conspiracy existed in the Rockland incident.
The lecturer was Jan R. Reber, president of Security Perceptions Unlimited of Southport, Conn., and a consultant to Fortune 500 companies on crimes such as extortion and kidnapping. His company assesses labor unrest and ''extremist thinking'' for corporations, and advises them on risks, preventive methods and guidelines.
Mr. Reber was the third to speak on ''Terrorism: Tyranny of the Minority,'' the title of a series of talks dealing with terrorism's effect on social institutions, its influence on the conduct of United States foreign policy and its impact internationally.
Mr. Reber said that Weather Underground members involved in the Rockland murders ''avoided the Federal Bureau of Investigation, as did the people in the Patty Hearst case, by moving into the black criminal underground.''
By calling an organization the Black Liberation Army, he said, ''you give a political veneer to crimes.'' He did not think that the Black Panthers as a party had any connection with the Brink's assault, despite an earlier influence it had on radical thinking.
In Rockland, he said, ''It was a case of black criminals and white revolutionaries working in tandem, and they were caught at it.'' He referred to items found in the homes of suspects, including diagrams of police stations, lists of police officers, automatic weapons and bomb-making paraphernalia. These did not indicate a political conspiracy was involved, he said, adding: ''Bank robberies have been done for years with automatic weapons; the police diagrams were an unknown factor, depending on how current they were, and the names of police officers included some who had retired.
''There is no intent to organize mass activity in the United States This was just one expropriation,'' and it failed.  Addressing the broader issue of terrorism, Mr. Reber said its origins were with ''socially political activists'' who were ''issueoriented at the beginning.'' They ''participate in demonstrations, then become full-time activists and extremists and, later, terrorists,'' he said.
Mr. Reber drew a profile of the terrorist, referring to those functioning in transnational terrorism, excepting the Palestine Liberation Organization and the Irish Republican Army: middle- to upper-class background, some higher education, an age in the early 20's to late 30's, qualities of idealism and dedication, well-armed and organized, using propaganda and threats with emotional impact as key weapons.
The typical terrorist, he said, sees a personal ability to change conditions and has a view of why the aggression takes place, not an interest in violence for its own sake. Such terrorists usually have a political plan of action if a government is overthrown.
These terrorists, he said, use a wide range of successful tactics.  Capture and punishment of such terrorists are rare. Some demands, which are often complex and unrelated to ransom, accompany the actions, aggravating political and economic relationships in the absence of national policies of response. Often, some demands are met.
Mr. Reber discussed the acceptance of women in terrorist movements and the unusually violent roles they sometimes play. Of the 28 people wanted in Germany for terrorist activity now, he said, '' 19 are women.''
According to Mr. Reber, the police in the United States term terrorism here a ''guns-and-grass'' subculture, where explosives are used by drug-using terrorists who live in communal situations.  ''Brink's was a money-raiser, not part of the usual looking, waiting and planning that is typical of terrorists,'' he said.
Mr. Reber was asked about terrorists at the age of 40. ''Most are dead or in prison by that age,'' he replied.

Graphic

 
Illustrations: photo of John O'Donnell, Patricia Foy and John Leonard


End of Document