WEST EUROPEANS CALLED READY TO ACT ON TERROR
The New York Times
April 29, 1986, Tuesday, Late City Final Edition


Copyright 1986 The New York Times Company
Section: Section A; Page 6, Column 1; Foreign Desk
Length: 911 words
Byline: By JAMES M. MARKHAM, Special to the New York Times
Dateline: BONN, April 28
Body


Senior European officials say President Reagan will find his principal allies at the Tokyo summit meeting disposed to take fresh steps against international terrorism, but at the same time keen to preserve the annual gathering's character as a forum for aligning economic policies.
According to the officials in various capitals, the rifts within the Western alliance over the American air strike on Libya have made several European leaders eager to limit their differences with Washington and poised them to move well beyond past summit declarations on international terrorism.
The three-day summit meeting, assembling the leaders of the United States, West Germany, Japan, Britain, France, Italy and Canada, convenes in Tokyo on Sunday.
The most notable switch has come from France, where President Francois Mitterrand has dropped his earlier opposition to discussing terrorism. The French hostages in Lebanon, the relative popularity in France of the American raid, terrorist blows at home - all vaguely mixed with rising resentment against immigrant workers from North Africa - appear to have influenced Mr. Mitterrand.
French 'Are Ready'
''We are ready for an international antiterrorist organization involving police, secret intelligence services, possibly with an extension to the military,'' the French leader told the Tokyo daily Yomiuri Shimbun.
He hedged this call for cooperation by adding the caveat that the foreign policy of each participating nation should remain ''free and autonomous.'' Officials in Elysee Palace insisted that he was not urging the formation of a new bureaucracy but better coordination of existing mechanisms.
A prevailing view in Paris is that both Mr. Mitterrand and Prime Minister Jacques Chirac, the French conservative who will be attending the Tokto meeting as well, were profoundly shocked by the virulence of the anti-French reaction in the United States to their decision to prohibit British-based F-111 bombers from using French airspace on their way to Libya.
Their debut together - a Socialist President, a rightist Prime Minister -will be the most conspicuous test of their so-called cohabitation dictated by the triumph of the right in parliamentary elections last month. Mr. Chirac, however, appears content to allow the President assume the larger public role, possibly in the hope of reaping credit at home for toughening France's terrorist policies behind the scenes.
 
Pressure of Italian Premier
In Italy, Prime Minister Bettino Craxi has other reasons for being direct on the terrorist issue in Tokyo. Disputes over how to deal with Libya and terrorism have put harsh strains on his badly divided five-party coalition Government, which briefly collapsed last year after Rome allowed a Palestinian implicated in the hijacking of the luxury liner Achille Lauro to leave the country.
One senior Italian official said that in the last year frictions over terrorism had generated ''the worst relations ever with the United States'' and that Mr. Craxi was determined to mend ties in Tokyo. ''For us, it is very important to restore a spirit of cohesion in the alliance,'' the official said.
Reports from Britain say Prime Minister Margaret Thatcher has given her support to a five-point American plan that would improve extradiction procedures between summit nations, impose stricter visa requirements for citizens of countries that foment terrorism, set up a global blacklist of diplomats and others known to be implicated in terrorism and mandate closer cooperation among security agencies.
Yet a senior British official predicted ''a relatively quiet summit,'' saying he did not think that economic issues would be completely swamped by the terrorist question, which is expected to be handled in a separate declaration.
 
Kohl Talking Tough
Harmony will presumably also be contributed by Chancellor Helmut Kohl, who has been talking tough on terrorism. But the West German leader ruled out any mellowing of his opposition to economic sanctions against Libya. ''I can see no argument whatsoever that could change our position,'' he said before leaving for Tokyo.
Outside public forums, West German officials have become quite vehement in voicing irritation over what they consider the hypocrisy of the Reagan Administration's demanding economic sanctions against Libya while American oil companies continue to do a booming business there.
Writing in The Times of London, David Watt, a columnist, made the point that the economic mechanisms of the Tokyo gathering were working better than its political ones. ''The trouble arises,'' he said, ''where the perception of common danger is not fully shared, and where there is no consensus about probable causes and effects.''
''In the case of terrorism,'' he said, ''there is growing agreement about the danger but still great argument about its nature and origins and the best way to deal with it.''
With the dollar falling steadily and Congress and the Administration showing signs of taking the budget deficit seriously, Mr. Reagan is viewed by many Europeans as in a fairly strong position to demand brisker expansion of the Japanese and the West German economies.
Yet, though feeling pressure both from Washington and West Germany's European partners, Mr. Kohl will probably resist demands that he further cut interest rates and slash taxes and - in his view - possibly endanger a firm-recovery scenario that he hopes will guarantee re-election for his center-right coalition next January.


End of Document