WEST MUST ACT TO STOP TERRORISM BUS
Charleston Gazette (West Virginia)
October 24, 1994, Monday


Copyright 1994 Charleston Newspapers
Section: Editorial; Pg. P4A
Length: 746 words
Byline: A.M. Rosenthal
Body


The terrorists' struggle is not primarily against Israel but the
Western concepts of freedom of thought, religion, sexual equality and
political action.
THE BUS CREEPS along, stops an instant for a traffic signal and
disintegrates. Later, police have a difficult time separating the
bits of bone, deciding which belong to the corpses of passengers and
which to the people torn apart in their offices and shops on Madison
Avenue.
Is that what it will take?  Would Americans then understand the
meaning to them of what happened in Tel Aviv, Israel?  Would we grasp
that we are not bystanders far off but traveling on the road to our
own Dizengoff Street?
Probably not. Pan Am 103 and the vaporization of 270 souls did
not make us see the road or who awaited us. Nor did the extermination
of the 241 U.S. servicemen and 58 French paratroopers in the Beirut,
Lebanon, massacre, or the deaths of 95 Argentine Jews in Buenos
Aires, Argentina.
Not even the bombing of the World Trade Center, the essence of
American financial prestige, stirred people for more than a month or
two.
All these terrorist attacks, and scores more, were the work of
Islamic extremists. Except for brief bursts of indignation, the West
has shown a passivity that shames its leaders, people and
civilization.
The only explanation is that the West fears confronting
terrorism straight on. To do that, the West would first have to face
realities that would embarrass some of its Arab allies. That could
wind up costing diplomatic advantage - and money.
Terrorists say that their target is Israel.  But if they ever
reach their goal of the end of Israel, terrorism will continue.
The struggle is not primarily against Israel but the Western
concepts of freedom of thought, religion, sexual equality and
political action. Islamic extremists see them as a disease and
Israel as a carrier.
For the terrorists, there is also a continuing enemy within
Islam - all Muslims and Muslim governments that defy the laws,
behavior and restrictions of Islam as they exist in the passions of
the extremists.
Other religions will be openly ranked with Judaism as objects of
disgust, unclean, destined for oblivion or servitude. The public
practice of Christianity is already considered so vile and dangerous
that it is banned in Saudi Arabia.
As in most religions, hate and tolerance are both written into
Islamic scriptures.  But the extremists have been taught only one -
not just by their mullahs but by assorted kings, presidents and
fuehrers who now turn to the West for protection.
In Israel, Gaza and the West Bank, Hamas now burns the torch of
terrorism.  Yasser Arafat "deplores" the current killings and maybe
means it politically at the moment.
He tried - despite Hamas' record, and after the White House lawn
agreement with Israel - to get closer to Hamas.  But he cannot
control it or his own Palestine Liberation Organization, which is
supposed to police Hamas.
When independence or full autonomy comes, PLO members might very
well choose Hamas over Arafat.  Perhaps Hamas, which proclaims
brotherhood with the PLO, will find a job for him someplace.
Confronting terrorists means confronting their masters.  Iran
supplies the money, guns and explosives, and Syria the haven and
training grounds.
Washington and Israel play down Syrian involvement in terrorism
in their passion to get President Assad to sign a peace treaty. He
is so contemptuous of both countries that he has never disbanded the
Hamas branch in downtown Damascus, Syria, nor the nine terrorist
groups bivouacked in Syria and Lebanon.
What's more, financing and arming of Hamas and similar groups
extends beyond the Middle East - particularly to the United States
The Department of Justice says the FBI is getting on the job.
Steven Emerson, the American journalist, has already devoted years to
it. On Nov. 21, PBS will present his documentary, "Jihad in America
."
Anti-terrorist specialists know what could be done, given the
will.  First, the United and States and Israel would tell Syria to
close every terrorist camp or give up hope of a treaty, which it
needs more than Israel does. Western friends of Iran would be told:
Do business with them or us, not both.
U.S. intelligence would release names of the collection of
Mideast officials who have supplied or still are supplying terrorism
with money, guns or protection - all of them, kings and emirs
included.
All are entirely doable and effective - once the West decides to
stop the bus before it gets to Madison Avenue.
Rosenthal is a columnist for The New York Times.

Load-Date: January 30, 1995


End of Document