WEST GERMANY FEARS TERRORISM WAS MOTIVE IN POLITICIAN'S KILLING
The New York Times
May 12, 1981, Tuesday, Late City Final Edition


Copyright 1981 The New York Times Company
Section: Section A; Page 3, Column 1; Foreign Desk
Length: 308 words
Dateline: BONN, May 11
Body


West Germany's chief prosecutor said today that the assassination of the treasurer of the Free Democratic Party was being investigated as an act of political terrorism.
The party official, Heinz Karry, 61 years old, died after being shot in the abdomen this morning.
West Germany fears terrorism was motive in politician's killingThe prosecutor, Kurt Rebmann, said the slaying was possibly the work of a ''group of persons belonging to a terrorist organization.''
Mr. Karry's death has also drawn attention because it parallels the murder of an Austrian political leader, Heinz Nittel, in Vienna on May 1.
Mr. Karry, as Minister of Economic Affairs in Hesse, advocated construction of a nuclear fuel reprocessing plant and expansion of the Frankfurt airport, projects opposed by environmentalists.
He was recently accused of misusing party election funds and of involvement in illegal weapons deals. Though neither charge has been proved, Mr. Karry was not re-elected to a regional post because of the dispute.
Mr. Nittel, 50, was the minister responsible for transport issues in the Vienna regional government. His support for the construction of urban expressways was also opposed by environmentalists.
Both Mr. Karry and Mr. Nittel had Jewish backgrounds. Mr. Karry's father, a Jew, survived detention in concentration camps under the Nazis, and the son was honorary chairman of a Jewish aid organization in Frankfurt. Mr. Nittel was chairman of the Austrian-Israeli Society.
 
----
 
Caller Claims Responsibility
BONN, Tuesday, May 12 (Reuters) -An anonymous telephone caller who said he represented ''The Movement of the Third Reich'' claimed responsibility for the killing of Heinz Karry. A spokesman for the prosecutor's office in Karlsruhe said the group, presumed to be rightist, was not known to police. The call was made to a Frankfurt newspaper office.

Graphic

 
Illustrations: Photo of Heinz Karry


End of Document