What's wrong with conservatives?
Richmond Times Dispatch (Virginia)
May 5, 2013 Sunday
State Edition


Copyright 2013 Richmond Newspapers, Inc. All Rights Reserved
Section: COMMENTARY; Pg. E-02
Length: 836 words
Body


What's wrong with conservatives?
Editor, Times-Dispatch:
The left is right. The state of California, as well as our federal government, should pay for men trapped in women'sbodies to switch out for the body they should have been given. The same goes for women who decide they are in the wrong gender place. If, down the road, they decide that switching was a mistake, taxpayers should pay for the mulligan as well.
People who do not like their noses, ears or entire faces should be entitled to cosmetic surgery, and the obese entitled to liposuction at taxpayer expense. Teeth-whitening should be the no-cost right of every citizen.
What is wrong with these right-wing bigots?
David H. Worrell Jr.
Richmond.
Does coming out merit presidential call?
Editor, Times-Dispatch:
I'm eagerly awaiting a call from the president to congratulate me on being both straight and married. I admit my basketball game is a little off, but that's no reason to discriminate.
Richard F. O'Hare.
Powhatan.
Kudos to NYPD for vigilance
Editor, Times-Dispatch:
Bart Hinkle's Op/Ed column "What does Boston say about diversity?" discusses the recent attacks by two terrorist brothers. Hinkle is unfairly critical of the New York Police Department (NYPD), which knows much about combating terrorism since foreign terrorists killed thousands of innocent Americans on 9/11.
Hinkle quotes an Associated Press report on the NYPD that said the police "put American citizens under surveillance and scrutinized where they are, prayed and worked ... not because of charges of wrongdoing but because of their ethnicity." Moreover, Hinkle slams what he calls "the NYPD's stop-and-frisk policy in which officers overwhelmingly single out black and Hispanic individuals for pat-down searches." He offers no proof of discrimination.
Hinkle neglected to state that NYPD's courageous fight against terrorism has likely prevented foreign and domestic attacks similar to 9/11 and helped slash the homicide rate in New York City to the lowest it has been in half a century. The city's surveillance program deserves praise and support because it offers a model for other areas across the U.S.
Recently in The Wall Street Journal, journalist Judith Miller, who has written much about terrorism, noted, "In the dozen years since 9/11, the city (New York) has developed a counter-terror program that is a model of how to identify and stop killers like the (Boston)Tsarnaev brothers before they strike." Moreover, she adds, "The 1,000 cops and analysts who work in the NYPD intelligence and counterterrorism divisions, for instance, would likely have flagged TamerlanTsarnaev for surveillance, given Police Commissioner Ray Kelly's insistence on aggressively monitoring groups and individuals suspected of radicalization." Very importantly, Miller also cited the "close ties" maintained by the NYPD "to Muslim preachers and community leaders."
Lee Rice.
Richmond.
Don't blame U.S. for terrorism
Editor, Times-Dispatch:
David Sirota's Op/Ed column on foreign policy is as breathtaking in its fallacies as it is in its indictment of America.
Sirota quotes a Tom Brokaw statement that might be described as hand-wringing rather than factual evidence. Evidently Brokaw anecdotally has experienced Pakistani and Middle Eastern angst over the use of American drone strikes to kill Islamic extremists. He would have us believe that hatred of the U.S. and the root cause for "intensifying cycles of violence" are these strikes.
We did not declare war on the radical Muslims; they declared war on us along with vestiges of Western thought, reason and culture even when it is assimilated into the local persona. Drone strikes are not the reason that Iraqis andPakistani buy armored automobiles, fortify their houses and workplaces and send their children to schools in Jordan, Great Britain and the United States.
American drone strikes are not the reason that Middle Easterners wear Kevlar plates in their haute fashions. Drone strikes do not silence those who would espouse women's rights and education, nor would they destabilize Middle Eastern democratic governments as well as stifle all forms of free speech and thought.
I am certain I know the reason for the above, and it is not American drone strikes, as Sirota and Brokaw would have us believe.
James Hunter.
Petersburg.
The future lies in wind
Editor, Times-Dispatch:
Regarding your editorial "Rigell is Right":
While commendable, Rep. Scott Rigell's proposed plan is not as impressive as the Maryland Offshore Wind Energy Act of 2013, passed by the Maryland General Assembly.
Maryland has made it easier to fill out applications to begin wind energy projects and has economic incentives (renewable portfolio standards) in place to encourage more energy be derived from wind.
Our neighbor has seized the day and is pursuing wind power, a resource that, once harnessed, is unlimited. Oil and gas reserves, once tapped, start to decline and cannot be replenished. The smart, long-term solution to our energy needs is wind power.
Monica Lewis.
Richmond.

Notes

Letters to the Editor Copyright © 2013, The Richmond Times-Dispatch and may not be republished without permission. E-mail library@timesdispatch.com

Load-Date: May 7, 2013


End of Document