What's the uproar about Thomson and terrorism? Prisons have to do their job, no matter who their detainees.
St. Louis Post-Dispatch (Missouri)
November 19, 2009 Thursday
THIRD EDITION


Copyright 2009 St. Louis Post-Dispatch, Inc. All Rights Reserved
Section: NEWS; Pg. A15
Length: 673 words
Byline: PAT GAUEN • , pgauen@post-dispatch.com,  > 314-340-8154
Dateline: 0 
Body


It wasn't that the penitentiary in the woods outside Marion, Ill., was hidden, exactly. But neither had the Federal Bureau of Prisons used neon lights to mark the route to its then-toughest lockup.
Inside the razor wire, the warden at the time, Michael Cooksey, impressed me with the gravity of keeping of 360 inmates who in the old days would have qualified for Alcatraz.
"We have some very real concerns" about an assault from the outside, Cooksey told me in an interview. "We have inmates here who have a larger gross profit than General Motors. When you talk about outside resources, you talk about people here who have great access to things."
This was in 1994, by the way, when a financial collapse of GM would have seemed preposterous. The warden wouldn't say which inmate he meant, although I presumed it was mob boss John Gotti.
An attack was not just theoretical. In 1982, a group of men laid down a barrage of gunfire on the guard towers to try to keep the staff busy while six inmates headed for the fences. Nobody got out; nobody got killed. But the threat was clear.
Despite all this, I never heard anyone even whisper the idea that the prison be put somewhere else, for the good of Marion or the state of Illinois.
The city of Chester has coexisted comfortably with the largest assembly of scary bad guys Illinois has put in any one place - at the Menard Correctional Center - not to mention a separately run mental hospital heavily occupied by the violently insane.
So excuse me for being a little surprised about the controversy over possibly relocating Guantanamo Bay war crime detainees to Thomson, Ill.
It's a town of about 450 people along the Mississippi River near the northwestern corner of the state. Some Illinois politicians used to call the region "Forgotonia," because it lacked enough voters to attract campaigners.
But for this week, at least, it is the least forgotten part of the state.
In 2001, Illinois finished a 1,600-bed, high-security prison at Thomson (not to be confused with similar-sized Thomsonville, in Southern Illinois near Benton). There was never enough operating money to do more than park 200 minimum-security inmates there, hence its availability now for sale to feds in need of a place to park about 100 suspected terrorists and perhaps 1,500 regular felons.
Gov. Pat Quinn and U.S. Sen. Dick Durbin, D-Ill., are fully behind the idea, and the estimated 3,000 jobs it might bring.
But U.S. Rep. Don Manzullo, who represents the area, and Metro East's own Rep. John Shimkus, are among Republicans dead set against it.
"Will radical Islamic elements migrate to the area surrounding the terrorist prison?" Shimkus asked in a prepared statement.
A GOP ally, Rep. Tim Johnson, reasoned that if the prisoners are put in Illinois, their trials would be here, too. (Actually, trial venue is usually where a crime occurs.)
I can grasp the political controversy over whether to bring these people to a civilian trial instead of military.
But when it comes to physical risk, well, isn't the whole point that they are accused of plotting with their pals to kill us already - in any way and place they can?
Does anybody really think that al-Qaida has been pulling its punches just because its accused operatives are held offshore? Or that it matters to our enemies if their cohorts are held in Illinois instead of Indiana, or in Carroll County instead of Ogle?
Never mind that federal officials say we have more than 340 convicted terrorists of various stripes in our domestic prisons already.
And would you try to install your terrorist cell up in sparsely populated Forgotonia, where everybody knows everybody, and some pretty good marksmen live from one hunting season to the next?
I even heard concerns that if the detainees ended up in Illinois, it might provide reason for somebody to want to blow up Chicago's Willis (formerly Sears) Tower. Of course, five men have been convicted in federal court of plotting to do that already. I wonder if they will end up in Marion. Or whether anyone would notice if they did.

Load-Date: November 20, 2009


End of Document