What is the real problem?
TechNews: Illinois Institute of Technology
August 31, 2020 Monday


University Wire
Copyright 2020 UWIRE via U-Wire All Rights Reserved
Section: LATEST-NEWS; Pg. 1
Length: 389 words
Body


In four months, we have a new year! Yes, the year 2020 will be over. But when will COVID-19 get over? Don't you get this question every time when you want to go out without a mask or hand sanitizer? Masks and hand sanitizers have become our new routine and we think it will be fine once we have a vaccine out in the market. Well, that's just a usual world we now live in, where we have all the advanced technology and science to break down a virus which has taken millions of lives in just a few months!
But have we ever thought what is the real problem of this world? The real problem of this world is not about global warming, pandemics, terrorism, religion, politics, and all the current topics that news channels debate about. It is about our perception, attitude, individualism, thinking, and all the aspects that are the foundations of humanity. The biological and physiological aspects which make us the most intelligent and adaptable species on this earth.
If we think clearly and look at the past centuries, the earth has the best and the most happening time of all its life! But wait a minute, we do have a h--- lot of problems here! We have problems because we don't think clearly about a problem we have to solve. We are just focused on making things work fast and accessible, but we are ignoring the long-term side effects of it in the near future! And this is because each of us has the freedom to enjoy individuality and express our thoughts freely. But somewhere we still have a tendency to dominate the poor, believing that society works wells with you if you look "cool". We just don't care about anyone but for ourselves; and in a way which is not wrong, but to some extent we need to act like humans because we have the ability to think emotionally and intellectually to solve the issues in a better way. However, day by day our brain's neural network is just been hacked by the path that social media or others tell us, because we want to look "cool" like them, no matter what it costs us.
We already know the solution to this problem, and it is really simple. The only thing that we have to look into is the positive side of our perception and attitude, and channel our actions accordingly. We have to look at the problems, not just at the technical aspects but also on the difference that will be created by them.
 

Load-Date: August 31, 2020


End of Document