What Jews Think
The Forward
December 21, 2007


Copyright 2007 The Forward Association, Incorporated All Rights Reserved
Section: Letters; Pg. A8
Length: 356 words
Body


The release this month by the American Jewish Committee of  its annual survey of American Jewish opinion generated a few  headlines with its finding that Hillary Clinton was the favorite  contender for the Democratic presidential nomination, and Rudy Giuliani  for the Republican nomination. A few newspapers, especially in Israel,  delved into a few other notable findings.
For one, the past year saw a slight decline in the percentage of Jews  who feel very close to Israel, to 30% in 2007 from 37% in 2006. For  another, the issue most often selected as the most important in choosing  a president next year was the economy and jobs at 22%, in contrast to  the war in Iraq, cited by just 16%.
Largely unreported were a host of other findings, from immigration  reform (an overwhelming 67% favored giving illegals a pathway to citizenship)  and energy independence (82% called it very important) to increasingly  gloomy views of the prospects for peace in the Middle East.
One of the survey's most intriguing findings, however, went entirely  unnoticed. Asked about the issues that will determine their presidential  vote next year, a strong plurality of 42% picked either economy and  jobs or health care, the two domestic economic choices offered. By  contrast, only 36% picked one of the three Middle East-related suggestions,  the war in Iraq (16%), terrorism and national security (14%) or  support for Israel (6%).
Trailing far behind were the survey's noneconomic domestic choices,  immigration (6%), the energy crisis (6%) and education (4%).  Global warming and the environment were not among the choices, nor  was the future of the Supreme Court.
Anyone looking to the rest of the survey to flesh out American  Jewish views on the issues they most care about, however, might be  disappointed. Fully 15 of the survey's 38 questions touched on terrorism  and Middle East-related issues. Another five amplified energy and immigration,  the AJCommittee's signature domestic issues. The rest involved  antisemitism, Jewish identity and presidential choices.
None touched on economic issues  that is, the issues Jews said  they care about.

Load-Date: December 20, 2007


End of Document