WHAT DOES BEING AMERICAN MEAN NOW?
Pittsburgh Post-Gazette
December 16, 2011 Friday
PITTSBURGH PRESS EDITION


Copyright 2011 P.G. Publishing Co.
Section: EDITORIAL; Pg. A-7
Length: 604 words
Byline: Nat Hentoff
Body


Soon after George Washington died, Thomas Jefferson recalled that our first president often told him "he considered the new Constitution as an experiment on ... what dose of liberty man could be trusted for his own good" ("The Meaning of Independence," Edmund S. Morgan, University of Virginia Press).
Our Constitution's Bill of Rights guaranteed our individual liberties against the government. How's it doing?
I remembered Washington's worry about how much liberty we could protect during the 11th debate between Republican candidates for the presidency when former House Speaker Newt Gingrich said of the Patriot Act (rushed so quickly through Congress after 9/11): "I'm not aware of any specific change it needs."
As has become clear, that law began the systematic attack on vital parts of the Bill of Rights by President George W. Bush and Vice President Dick Cheney, further expended by President Barack Obama. In a roaring response to Mr. Gingrich, Rep. Ron Paul, R-Texas, reminded him: "Our early founders were very clear. They said, 'Don't be willing to sacrifice liberty for security.' Today it seems too easy that our government and our Congress is so willing to give up our liberties for our security"
Very easily, by a vote of 93-7, the Senate voted for amendments to the National Defense Authorization Act "that would require the military to hold suspected terrorists linked to al-Qaida or its affiliates, even those captured on U.S. soil, and detain some indefinitely without trial."
And, despite George Washington's warning, this legislation also would "deny suspected terrorists, even U.S. citizens seized within the (U.S.) nation's borders, the right to trial and subject them to indefinite detention." This is America?
The 93-7 vote defied a threat of a presidential veto by Mr. Obama who, since taking office, has been plundering the Constitution while also advocating preventive detention without trial. But this time he and fellow opponents, FBI Director Robert Mueller and Defense Secretary Leon Panetta, objected to giving the military such reigning authority over cases involving terrorism suspects while also dominating intelligence gathering.
But, as the AP also reported, the Senate then, in a face-saving move, "backed 99-1, a measure that said nothing in the bill changes current law relating to the detention of U.S. citizens and legal aliens."
The Patriot Act itself passed the Senate 98-1. The only dissenter was Sen. Russ Feingold, D-Wis., who, on Oct. 11, 2001, on the floor of the Senate, said:
"There is no doubt that if we lived in a police state, it would be easier to catch terrorists. If we lived in a country where the police were allowed to search your home at any time for any reason; if we lived in a country where the government was entitled to open your mail, eavesdrop on your phone conversations, or intercept your email communications ... the government would probably discover and arrest more terrorists or would-be terrorists, just as it would find more lawbreakers generally."
In the present Congress, Mr. Paul is not the only defender of what we used to tell other countries were our fundamental values, but they are not a majority. One of them is his son, Sen. Rand Paul, R-Ky., who, during the debate on the Defense Authorization bill, opposed an amendment that Sen. John McCain, R-Ariz., was supporting that would have permitted that American citizens suspected of terrorism would be denied a civilian trial.
With the 2012 elections nearing, listen carefully if any candidate for Congress or the presidency agrees with Russ Feingold and Rand Paul -- or even mentions the subject.

Notes

Nat Hentoff is a nationally renowned authority on the First Amendment and the Bill of Rights. He is a member of the Reporters Committee for Freedom of the Press, and the Cato Institute, where he is a senior fellow./

Load-Date: December 20, 2011


End of Document