What five recent books say about the 'new' terrorism;
Fighting Back: Winning the War Against Terrorism, edited by Neil Livingstone and Terrell Arnold. Lexington, Mass.: Lexington Books. 268 pp. $12.95.;
Hydra of Carnage: International Linkages of Terrorism, edited by Uri Ra'anan et al. Lexington, Mass.: Lexington Books. 638 pp. $56.;
Terrorism: How the West Can Win, edited by Benjamin Netanyahu. New York: Farrar, Straus & Giroux. 253 pp. $18.95.
Terrorism: As State-Sponsored Covert Warfare, by Ray Cline and Yonah Alexander. Fairfax, Va.: Hero Books. 118 pp. $12.95.
The War Against the Terrorists: How to Win It, by Gayle Rivers. Briarcliff Manor, N.Y.: Stein & Day. 248 pp. $17.95.
Christian Science Monitor (Boston, MA)
August 1, 1986, Friday


Copyright 1986 The Christian Science Publishing Society
Section: Book Review Pullout; Back Pg. essay; Pg. B8
Length: 1942 words
Byline: By Robin Wright; Robin Wright, a former Monitor correspondent, has covered terrorist attacks in the Middle East, Europe, and Africa. She is the author of ''Sacred Rage: The Wrath of Militant Islam.''
Body


No international problem seems more threatening today than terrorism. The images of the havoc it has wrought - a child gunned down in a Rome airport, nuns slaughtered in El Salvador, the tons of wreckage that buried 241 marines asleep in their Beirut barracks - are haunting.
The new brand of terrorism, an ageless phenomenon, is also the subject of controversy, reflected in five recent books that provide a spectrum of analysis and debate by a total of 68 scholars, defense and intelligence officials, diplomats, and others. Despite the different topics and approaches, the consensus is decidedly hawkish. There are five recurrent themes:
* A handful of states, most notably the Soviet Union, has ultimately been responsible for the majority of terrorist incidents around the world.
* In the 1980s, links among terrorist groups have increased to the point of becoming consortiums of multinationals.
* The common goal of various groups is to destabilize liberal Western democracies, particularly the United States.
* As an unconventional form of warfare in an age of unusable apocalyptic weaponry, terrorism is certain to escalate in the future.
* US policy has not dealt adequately or forcefully enough with the threat.
''Today international terrorists and their patrons are, in effect, at war with the US, and it is only a matter of time before they decide to carry the war to US shores. Many observers believe that World War III has already begun,'' warn Neil Livingstone and Terrell Arnold in their anthology, ''Fighting Back.''
Several authors draw just short of portraying the Russians as terrorist masterminds. ''A vast reservoir of information links Moscow to terrorist groups and activities around the globe.
''The Soviet Union has found the present pattern of terrorism to be a cost-effective and low-risk policy for disrupting the West and challenging the US for control of key populations, vital straits, raw materials, strategic minerals and markets,'' the editors of ''Fighting Back'' conclude.
Former Deputy CIA Director Ray Cline and Yonah Alexander allege that ''eighty percent of the terrorist groups in the world are at least superficially Marxist-Leninist in their political thinking and claim the right of support from the Soviet Union and its client states'' - in ''Terrorism: As State-Sponsored Covert Warfare,'' which is based on their study for the Army.
Each book includes allegations of Russian manipulation, from arming the Palestine Liberation Organization and running Bulgarian operatives to assassinate Pope John Paul II, to aiding European terrorists in attacking NATO facilities.
Some of the documented evidence - to which half of ''Hydra of Carnage'' is devoted - does indeed support Soviet culpability. Among the reasons offered are that the Russians gained parity with the US in weapons technology, and that Moscow felt emboldened after the US debacle in Vietnam to probe deeper into Europe and the third world, sensing that it was unlikely to be challenged. And connections are increasingly evident.
Terrorism specialist Walter Laqueur's example is quoted in ''Fighting Back.'' ''An operation would be planned in West Germany by Palestine Arabs, executed in Israel by terrorists recruited in Japan with weapons acquired in Italy but manufactured in Russia, supplied by an Algerian diplomat, and financed with Libyan money.''
But several contributors to these books too readily dismiss various groups or movements as surrogates, proxies, and satellites of the Russians, discounting as passe the strong and genuinely indigenous nationalist, ethnic, or religious factors in political violence.
Terrorism is too often interpreted in the xenophobic terms of a bipolar world: the Russians will aid and abet any group that contributes to undermining the West. And a few almost make it appear that a monolithic, anti-American force has been consolidated out of disparate groups and then unleashed over the past decade.
The conclusions stem in part from interpreting terrorist motives. ''International terrorism . . . is not a sporadic phenomenon born of social misery and frustration,'' Benjamin Netanyahu, Israel's ambassador to the United Nations, writes in his anthology, ''Terrorism: How the West Can Win.'' ''It is rooted in the political ambitions and designs of expansionist states and the groups that serve them. The root cause of terrorism lies not in grievances but in a disposition toward unbridled violence.''
Cline and Alexander add, ''It has been fashionable among romantic-minded observers of international affairs to believe that terrorism can be considered the poor man's warfare, the ultimate weapon of the weak with a righteous cause for redressing grievances against established authority.''
Although this collection of literature might seem comprehensive - relating terrorism to the media, specific weaponry trends, narcotic trafficking, and the law, as well as providing case studies of countries such as Japan, Italy, and Turkey - there is a major hole. Many authors seem unwilling to recognize that another force is increasingly at play in world politics: a growing mood of defiance and independence, particularly in the third world.
Many peoples have become disillusioned and angry with what they see as attempts by the superpowers of both East and West to dictate their policies, choose their rulers, and tell them what their priorities and values should be. Past violence in the Middle East, for example, has been in part ''a rejection of imported ideas and institutions as a means of coping with the problems of modernity, and a preference for the more native and more familiar system,'' writes P. J. Vatikiotis in ''Terrorism: How the West Can Win.''
But the reaction - most visible in violence, although also evident in UNESCO, the World Court, and other forums - is not always an attack on democratic principles but instead often on specific, and separate, US policies.
Palestinian extremists attacked US targets because they want a homeland, and Washington is Israel's main backer. Salvadorean leftists killed American victims to protest US military presence and political influence in Central America. Lebanese Shiite suicide bombers opposed US military support for the ruling Christian minority.
Few terrorists really seek to overthrow the Reagan administration, and many who make use of the Soviet connection are in fact not ideologically compatible with communism.
Actions by Iran - which along with Libya, Syria, Cuba, North Korea, and others frequently named in these volumes as patrons of state-sponsored terrorism - are a case in point.
One of the most important messages to come out of the Iranian revolution and the tragic hostage ordeal was that a third-world country can defy both East and West - and survive. That has set a tremendously important precedent with long-term implications far beyond the Middle East that have yet to be fully understood.
Much of the current terrorism is in part a challenge to the status quo of a bipolar world that demonstrates little respect for other cultures or their pleas for independence and dignity. The low-intensity warfare of terrorism is becoming the main vehicle - especially in the third world, which could never win a conventional conflict - to fight off, and maybe even end, what it perceives as foreign encroachment and domination.
''Like virtually all other belligerency, terrorism is not perceived by its agents to be a first strike. It is intended as a reprisal,'' says James Burtchael in a deeply thoughtful essay in ''Fighting Back.'' ''We must beware of treating terrorist adversaries as violators of the peace if they were roused to rage in the first place by an injustice that had tormented them for years, an injustice of which we were reasonably seen to be the patron and guarantor.'' Lacking a sense of history has also contributed to American ethnocentricity and a virtual schism with other cultures. Americans ''tend to identify politically significant time with the last 200 years - the timespan of their own existence as a separate state - rather than with the last 2,500 years,'' Adda Bozeman points out in ''Hydra of Carnage.'' Indeed, Americans tend to wipe the political slate clean every four or eight years with a new administration, relegating policy mistakes or mishaps to history, which is dangerous, since most outsiders view US actions in continuum.
The historical American frame of reference overlooks the fact that other societies are more consciously attuned to the past, Ms. Bozeman adds. ''Further, when seen in conjunction with the trend to think materialistically about the destinies of nations, it explains why we cannot satisfy the elementary requirement of statecraft - namely, that of understanding 'the other' on his own terms.''
Unfortunately, all authors agree on one point: Terrorism will increase. But that does not necessarily support the final contention: A more forceful response is needed. All five books focus heavily on US policy, most often criticizing reactive gestures rather than proactive positioning.
''If we are serious about stopping terrorism, we will use force whenever we deem it justified and feasible,'' not just as a last resort, Hugh Tovar contends in ''Hydra of Carnage.'' He also suggests going on the offensive by more actively aiding or instigating insurgencies in places such as Indochina. Adds CIA Director William Casey, ''We need not insist on absolute evidence that the targets were used solely to support terrorism. Nor should we need to prove beyond all reasonable doubt that a particular element or individual in that state is responsible for specific terrorist acts.''
Gayle Rivers, a New Zealand counterterrorist who claims to have led several rather flashy secret missions on behalf of Western governments, goes even further in ''The War Against the Terrorists.'' Retaliation proportionate to the original attack or bringing terrorists to justice is not enough. ''A terrorist in prison is an invitation to further terrorism, and until we understand that and act on it, our mind-set will not be ready to win that war,'' he warns.
And Mr. Livingstone argues: ''Those who allege that the Western democracies run the risk of becoming like the terrorists they oppose by adopting proactive options to suppress and defeat them are engaging in a cruel form of deception and falsehood, which only encourages and emboldens terrorists who want the US to be paralyzed with indecision and moral vacillation. . . . When living in the jungle, it is best to observe the law of the jungle.'' Yet where does a democracy draw the line on evidence if it is not provable in court - or beyond all reasonable doubt?
More thoughtful is Mr. Burtchael's advice that ''It is in the national interest not to be blinded by outrage but to ascertain whether we are dealing with people who are themselves the victims of earlier and possibly more grievous injury: injury that we may have inflicted or conspired in or from which we can give them relief.
''It is an act of hubris to refuse to visualize the character, motivation, and popular constituency of one's adversary. . . . When we can bring ourselves to recognize no fair grievance, then we are obliged to suppress a terrorist movement.''
In general, as Burtchael implies, it would be a historic tragedy to widen the political and cultural gulf that has contributed so much to contemporary terrorism by yielding totally to the current momentum supporting the use of force.
The US might profit more in the long term by showing the maturity and confidence of a superpower and, rationally rather than emotionally, reassessing its role in and responsibilities to the world.


End of Document