What color is terror: Changing the way terrorism is portrayed in the media
The Daily Athenaeum: West Virginia University
April 13, 2015 Monday


University Wire
Copyright 2015 UWIRE via U-Wire All Rights Reserved
Section: COLUMNS; Pg. 1
Length: 1050 words
Body


About two months ago in Chapel Hill, N.C., Deah Barakat, Yusor Abu-Salha and Razan Abu-Salha were shot to death in the sanctity of their home by their neighbor Craig Stephen Hicks, police allege.
They were three young Muslim American students who were active participants in community service and philanthropy and Hicks is a 46-year-old self-proclaimed "anti-theist" who was taking night classes to become a paralegal.
Local authorities initially stated the murders were over a "parking dispute," and the media quickly began echoing this allegation until family and friends of the three victims spoke out. Their loved ones gave reasons why this was most likely a hate crime committed due to the victims' religious and ethnic identities. Most news outlets did the right thing and called for further investigations to take place before concluding the motive of the attack.
Only a few days later, Finn Nørgaard and Dan Uzan were shot and killed, by Omar El Hussein in Copenhagen, according to Danish police. Film director Nørgaard was shot trying to stop El Hussein after he encountered him at a Danish cultural center with an automatic weapon. Uzan was a Jewish community member on duty as security for a bat mitzvah, who was killed at a synagogue while defending those inside.
Prior to any formal investigation, authorities and media alike quickly condemned this attack as an act of terrorism. El Hussein was labeled a terrorist, with many saying he was motivated by cartoons drawn of the Prophet Muhammad. El Hussein's history exhibited violence and crime, with links to a Danish gang called the Brothas, and according to CNN he pledged allegiance to ISIS on Facebook right before the attack. However, there's currently no substantial evidence to suggest he was collaborating with the terrorist organization.
These two tragedies have some striking similarities. In both cases, the perpetrators allegedly killed their victims because they disagreed with certain beliefs they held. Just based on descriptions in the news, all the victims seemed to be the type of people who had huge hearts filled with love and compassion for humanity, regardless of opinions or beliefs.
West Virginia University Muslim Students Association president Mouaz Haffar said the North Carolina students were an inspiration.
"The three killed had some of the most inspirational lives in terms of community service, leadership, family ethics and academics. They were shining pillars of what living as a Muslim truly is. They were martyrs for peace."
Author Douglas Murray said Nørgaard, the first victim of the Copenhagen shooting, saved countless lives.
"People inside the cafe now credit Nørgaard with helping to save their lives. If he had not struggled with the gunman and bought precious extra seconds for the police and others, it is likely that the number of fatalities at the free-speech event would have been far higher [...] Bravery is Finn Nørgaard."
Daniel Gonn, friend of the second Copenhagen victim, said he was selfless and loving toward all.
"Dan was a warm, loving and exuberant friend who was always there for others and would lend a helping hand without hesitating. He had a huge heart with room for everyone. He was a son, a brother, a friend and a teammate who was taken from us far too soon."
People need to understand the following statement. Hate has no skin color, ethnicity, religion or race.
But apparently terror does, and if you watch mainstream news networks you would know that it's brown, Middle Eastern and Muslim.
Craig Stephen Hicks killed three innocent people senselessly and Omar El Hussein killed two. Although the scenarios are similar, many in the mainstream media handled the cases extremely differently.
As stated previously, in Hicks' case, many in the media were quick to state the cause of the murders was a parking dispute. His wife's lawyer stressed the "importance of access to mental health care services" when referring to the case, and the media didn't change their tune until the victims' family spoke out.
In El Hussein's case, statements made by authorities and media alike assumed the motive to be religiously inspired and, again, labeled the crime as an act of terror.
Let me be clear. In both cases, the criminals' actions are despicable, and they deserve the swift hand of justice after a proper investigation. As a human being who values ethics, I believe this, and as a Muslim, I believe this. The Quran says: "Oh you who believe, be strong in your support of justice, witnesses for the sake of God, even if it be against yourselves, or your parents, or those who are close to you, [regardless of] whether they be rich or poor, for God has priority over them."
Having said that, I now sincerely ask, why is El Hussein's crime considered terrorism while Hicks' is not? Is the term "terrorist" really only reserved for dark-skinned, Muslim males?
It seems like the mainstream media's reasoning on how to label criminals tends to follow the following logic. If you are an African American criminal, you must be a thug or a gangster, and if you are a Muslim or Middle-Eastern criminal, you must be a terrorist.
But if you are a white criminal, you are just an ordinary criminal who probably had mental health issues (or was angry about parking). Of course, not all media outlets are guilty of doing this, but enough are to make this a serious issue.
Don't think for a second this is something specific to Arabs or Muslims. Many minorities observe this phenomenon and express the same sentiment as myself, thinking, why the double standard?
When this phenomenon occurs, it is not an injustice to the criminals but an injustice to the law-abiding people belonging to many ethnic and religious minorities. This is never about the actual criminal, but rather about being fair and equal when covering events like these.
The purpose of this article is to raise awareness about this issue, and to call on all media to cover news in an unequivocally fair and unbiased manner. Avoid unnecessary sensationalism for the sake of profits and when covering any event, be as cautious as possible to avoid breaking journalistic ethics and integrity.
Why have I never seen non-Muslims who commit horrific atrocities being called "terrorists" in the media? Is it really a term only reserved for Muslim criminals?

Load-Date: April 13, 2015


End of Document