WHAT IS TERRORIST ABU NIDAL UP TO IN BAGHDAD?
Pittsburgh Post-Gazette (Pennsylvania)
January 27, 1999, Wednesday,
SOONER EDITION


Copyright 1999 P.G. Publishing Co.
Section: WORLD,
Length: 741 words
Byline: JAMES RISEN, THE NEW YORK TIMES
Dateline: WASHINGTON
Body


Abu Nidal, one of the world's most infamous terrorists, moved to Baghdad late last year and obtained the protection of Iraq's president, Saddam Hussein, according to intelligence reports received by U.S. and Middle Eastern government officials. The reports have raised questions about whether Iraq is pushing to establish a terrorism network, American and Middle Eastern officials say.
Abu Nidal, a brutal survivor of the Middle East's terrorist wars dating to the 1970s, had been living in Cairo for more than a year, according to Middle Eastern government officials who say they have information from inside his organization. While intelligence information about terrorist groups is by nature difficult to obtain and hard to corroborate, American intelligence officials say they consider these Middle Eastern officials to be highly reliable about terrorism in the region.
Although Abu Nidal's organization is a shadow of the terrorist machine that staged airport killings in the mid-1980s and other raids on Arab, Jewish and other targets, since he moved to Egypt, the Middle Eastern officials said, he has been directing attacks on Islamic radicals who have been at war with the Egyptian government.
U.S. intelligence officials said he has been hard-pressed financially and has been seeking financial backing and a new government sponsor since Col. Moammar Gadhafi of Libya, looking for ways to persuade the United Nations to lift economic sanctions, backed away from him in the early 1990s.
Abu Nidal's move to Iraq, which he was forced to leave 15 years ago, suggests that he may have renewed a relationship with Saddam.
"He could become a more significant threat again if he finds more effective state sponsorship," a U.S. intelligence official added.
Abu Nidal still has 200 to 300 followers in his organization, and they have been active in recent years, especially against Arab targets. His group's recent actions included killing a radical Egyptian cleric in Yemen in July, according to the Middle Eastern government officials. Saddam lacks such hard-earned expertise at terrorism.
Officials caution that there is no evidence that Abu Nidal is planning to conduct terrorism on Iraq's behalf. In recent years, he has not attacked American targets and has become a lower priority for U.S.  counterterrorism officials, who have focused instead on Osama bin Laden, the Saudi exile who officials say was the mastermind behind the bombings of the U.S. embassies in Kenya and Tanzania in August.
But counterterrorism experts in the Middle East say Abu Nidal remains a significant threat. One official who has watched Abu Nidal for years said, "Osama bin Laden is a student by comparison."
About 10 days before the Dec. 16 start of American and British attacks on Iraq, Abu Nidal traveled from Cairo to Baghdad through Tehran, Mideast officials said.
Some American officials have acknowledged receiving reports that Abu Nidal has moved to Baghdad. After concluding that the Central Intelligence Agency and other intelligence services had blunted Iraq's previous efforts to sponsor terrorism, officials in Washington say that that could change with the arrival of Abu Nidal.
Abu Nidal was once America's most wanted terrorist. A 1989 State Department report called his organization the most dangerous terrorist group in the world, and a 1991 report calculated that it had been responsible for more than 100 attacks and the deaths of more than 280 people since 1974.
A Palestinian renegade who broke with the Palestinian Liberation Organization to undertake his own terrorist campaign, Abu Nidal, now about 60, has had a long running war with both the Palestinian leader Yasser Arafat and King Hussein of Jordan, accusing them of being too willing to compromise with Israel. He has vowed to kill both Arafat and Hussein, and the PLO sentenced him to death in absentia in 1974.
He and Saddam also have a tortured history, and their relationship is not built on mutual trust. Iraq helped Abu Nidal become an international terrorist in the early 1970s, but Abu Nidal left Bagdhad in the early 1980s, in part because Saddam discovered that he was also working with Syria.
"He was double dealing on Iraq," says one Middle Eastern government's expert on Abu Nidal's operations.
Although he has a history of conducting terrorist acts on behalf of his hosts, Abu Nidal has also worn out his welcome because of his bloody methods and his willingness to betray his sponsors.

Load-Date: January 27, 1999


End of Document