What's important now?;
Terrorism has profoundly changed our priorities, new MU poll shows
LANCASTER NEW ERA (LANCASTER, PA.)
November 1, 2001, Thursday


Copyright 2001 Lancaster Newspapers, Inc.
Section: NEWS,
Length: 822 words
Byline: Tom Murse
Body


Remember when the single most important problem you faced was the quality of your schools?
Or the amount of taxes you paid?
Or whether you'd ever see your Social Security benefits?
Those days are gone.
Terrorism and its effects on the economy have turned our priorities upside-down, according to a Millersville University poll made public today.
#POLL1.MURT004#
Pennsylvanians are now more worried about balancing their checkbooks, keeping their jobs and feeling safe than they are about education and health care -- both of which were our biggest concerns before the Sept. 11 terrorist attacks.
There's been a "clear shift" since last year in what we consider to be our top priorities, according to the Keystone Poll. And it's all because of the hijacked airplanes that crashed into the World Trade Center, the Pentagon and a field in western Pennsylvania.
"September 11 has, in a very profound way, changed the concerns of the country," said G. Terry Madonna, director of the university's Center for Politics & Public Affairs.
We're now worried about how much we can spend on holiday gifts and whether we'll even have a job to pay for them. Meanwhile, we've almost forgotten about crime, drugs and other previous concerns.
The survey found that 19 percent of voters identified their personal finances as the single most important problem facing their families.
Seventeen percent said the economy and unemployment was the biggest problem. And 15 percent said terrorism and safety was the biggest problem facing their fami- lies. The poll has a margin of error of about 4 percent.
"These issues have tended to push some other issues that have been pretty high on the priority list into a secondary tier," Madonna said.
Only 7 percent said health care was their family's biggest problem. Seven percent said taxes, 3 percent said education, 1 percent said Social Security and 1 percent said crime and drugs.
The high importance Pennsylvanians now put on their finances and the economy is a marked contrast to just a year ago. In September of 2000, voters were more worried about health care (23 percent), taxes (12 percent), education (11 percent), unemployment (10 percent) and the economy (6 percent).
Only 5 percent of those polled a year ago ranked personal finances as the most important problem facing their families.
Now it tops the list.
"Clearly the typical citizen is nervous about the economy and their place in it," Madonna said.
The voters who were surveyed believe that Pennsylvania's government leaders still need to address problems with education along with terrorism and the economy. But most don't specifically view problems with their schools as being their biggest problem.
"Pennsylvanians are sitting back and they're thinking, "How secure is my job? Can we afford health care? Can we send the kids to college?' In that sense, education for some is wrapped up in personal finances and their jobs," Madonna said.
"Make no mistake about it: The typical Pennsylvanian is growing increasingly concerned about that. And I think that personal finances and the economy -- unless there's another terrorist attack -- will tend to dominate (people's concerns)," Madonna said.
That's because while voters are clearly worried about terrorism, they're not overreacting.
Three of every four state residents surveyed last week said the Sept. 11 terrorist attacks have had very little or no effect on their normal, everyday life.
"Pennsylvanians are concerned, but not panicked," Madonna said.  "They understand that their lives are changed, and they may not go back to being "normal' maybe ever. But they're going back to business, mostly conducting their lives the way they used to."
That's despite the fact that about half of those surveyed said they were either somewhat or very worried that they or someone they know will become the victim of a terrorist attack during the next year.
In a separate but related finding, women were nearly twice as likely as men to worry about being the victim of a terrorist attack, according to the poll.
Only 8 percent said they were very worried and only 21 percent said they were somewhat worried that a terrorist attack will take place where they live.
Terrorism has also affected the way we view the president and former Gov. Tom Ridge, according to these findings:
'88 percent indicated they were very satisfied with the job President George Bush is doing.
'Nearly three in four Pennsylvanians have a favorable impression of Ridge, who is now the director of the Office of Homeland Security. That's his highest favorability rating ever.
The poll was conducted by the university's Center for Opinion Research over four days last week, Thursday through Sunday. The poll surveyed 504 registered voters. Of those, 213 were Democrats, 240 were Republicans and 51 were considered independent/other.
The poll was conducted for The Patriot-News of Harrisburg, the Philadelphia Daily News and Fox News (WTFX-TV) Philadelphia.

Graphic

 
COLOR PHOTO, G. Terry Madonna; MU professor

Load-Date: November 2, 2001


End of Document