What Drives Gun Sales: Terrorism, Politics and Calls for Restrictions
The New York Times
December 11, 2015 Friday
Late Edition - Final


Copyright 2015 The New York Times Company
Section: Section A; Column 0; National Desk; Pg. 28
Length: 556 words
Byline: By JOSH KELLER and GREGOR AISCH
Body


For gun makers, it was a familiar story. On Sunday, President Obama called for making it harder to buy assault weapons after the terrorist attack in San Bernardino, Calif. On Monday, the stock prices of two top gun makers, Smith & Wesson and Ruger, soared.
''President Obama has actually been the best salesman for firearms,'' said Brian W. Ruttenbur, an analyst with BB&T Capital Markets, a financial services firm. 
  Fear of gun-buying restrictions has been the main driver of spikes in gun sales, far surpassing the effects of mass shootings and terrorist attacks alone, according to federal background-check data analyzed by The New York Times.
  When a man shot and killed 26 people at Sandy Hook Elementary School in Newtown, Conn., gun sales did not set records until five days later, after President Obama called for banning assault rifles and high-capacity magazines.
  ''It would be like you've never owned a toaster, you don't really want a toaster, but the federal government says they're going to ban toasters,'' Mr. Ruttenbur said. ''So you go out and buy a toaster.''
  Gun Control Proposals
  Gun sales rose in New Jersey in 2013 after Gov. Chris Christie proposed measures that included expanding background checks and banning certain rifles. (Mr. Christie later vetoed one of the most stringent parts of the proposals.)
  The dynamic shows a Catch-22 for gun control proponents: Pushing for new restrictions can lead to an influx of new guns.
  When Maryland approved one of the nation's strictest gun-control measures in May 2013, gun sales jumped as buyers tried to beat the October deadline specified in the measure, which banned most semiautomatic rifles.
  As police officers evacuated people from New Orleans after Hurricane Katrina, legally registered guns were confiscated from civilians.
  The confiscations outraged gun owners and prompted an increase in gun sales in the area. Conservatives responded by pushing for a federal law prohibiting the seizure of firearms from civilians during an emergency, and many states followed with similar legislation.
  Gun sales have more than doubled in a decade, to about 15 million in 2013 from about seven million in 2002. More firearms are sold to residents in the United States than in any other country, according to Jurgen Brauer, a professor at Georgia Regents University.
  These estimates undercount total sales because they omit some purchases in states that do not require background checks for private sales. They also exclude permits that allow people in some states to buy multiple guns with a single background check.
  The increase is mostly due to higher sales of handguns, which are typically bought for self-defense. Two of the fastest-growing segments of the market are women and gun owners with concealed carry permits.
  Legal changes at the local level can lead to abrupt changes in sales.
  When Missouri repealed a requirement that gun buyers obtain a permit to buy a handgun in 2007, estimated gun sales went up and stayed up, by roughly 9,000 additional guns per month. The influx shifted gun-trafficking patterns, increasing the number of guns bought in Missouri that were later traced to crimes.
  And when the Supreme Court invalidated a ban on handguns in Washington, estimated handguns registered in the city went from near-zero to about 40 every month.

Graphic

 
CHARTS: Estimated gun sales per month, seasonally adjusted
Gun sales rose in New Jersey after Gov. Chris Christie proposed gun restrictions...
 ...and in Maryland as buyers tried to beat a deadline for an assault weapons ban.       

Load-Date: December 11, 2015


End of Document