What to worry & not worry about
Be our guest
Daily News (New York)
October 25, 2018 Thursday
1STAR Edition


Copyright 2018 Daily News, L.P. All Rights Reserved
Section: EDITORIAL; CS; Pg. 29
Length: 636 words
Byline: LOUIS KLAREVAS
Body


On Monday, an explosive device was found in a mailbox outside the Bedford, N.Y., residence of billionaire philanthropist George Soros. When the news broke, it garnered some national attention, but it was certainly not a front-page item. It was treated more as some isolated, low-risk incident.
Unbeknownst at the time, it was the first strike in a multi-prong attack targeting high-profile figures associated with the Democratic Party.
By Wednesday afternoon, several packages containing pipe bombs similar to the one delivered to Soros had been intercepted. Their targets: Rep. Maxine Waters, former Attorney General Eric Holder, former CIA Director John Brennan, former Secretary of State Hillary Clinton and former President Barack Obama.
While the situation remains fluid, with new information coming in every few minutes, there is one thing we can say for certain: What began on Monday with Soros is nothing short of terrorism.
Speaking during a press conference outside CNN headquarters in Manhattan, where the parcel intended for Brennan was delivered, Gov. Cuomo stated, "Terrorism is an attempt to strike terror, an attempt to strike fear. Obviously, these devices are an attempt to strike fear - hence, terrorism."
Cuomo's logic might be tautological, but he's correct. Because all of the targets are elites with ties to the Washington establishment, we can safely infer a political motive. And in the American intelligence community, premeditated, politically motivated acts of violence that target civilians are statutorily defined as acts of terrorism.
And given that the targets are, so far, all on the liberal side of the political spectrum, we are put on notice that the danger doesn't just come from abroad, but often emanates right here at home.
There are some nuggets of good news, however. For starters, no one was injured by any of the devices. That's in part because the system in place to minimize the damage largely worked. Measures designed to screen and snag potentially dangerous items in the mail did their job and flagged the pipe bombs before they could reach their final destinations.
The other interesting tidbit on this front, which has not been well reported as of yet, is that changes in postal rules may have forced the perpetrator to limit the explosive devices to small pipe bombs. As the envelopes containing the devices (at least some with six stamps) indicate, these items were likely under the 13 oz. maximum weight for a first-class parcel.
Which is to say, by preventing people from mailing any larger packages at a corner mailbox, the regulations put into effect post-9/11 might have effectively constrained the scale of the weaponry.
While even a 13-oz. pipe bomb can cause bodily harm, such small devices rarely result in death.
Of course, as terrorist attacks go, this one was not a complete failure. In fact, in terms of dominating media coverage and instilling fear, this incident could be seen as a smashing success. To make matters worse, unlike the devices that were snagged by the postal system before they could reach their intended targets, the explosive device addressed to CNN actually reached its destination because, in contrast to the others, this one was delivered by messenger.
Maybe in the long run that will lead to the capture of America's new most wanted terrorist, should someone at the courier service be able to identify the suspect. But until an arrest is made, we should all continue to exercise vigilance and common sense, especially given the fact that the postal service doesn't always move correspondence with great expediency.
To put it another way, be careful, there could be more bombs in the mail.
Klarevas teaches counter-terrorism at the University of Massachusetts, Boston, and is the author of "Rampage Nation: Securing America from Mass Shootings."

Load-Date: October 25, 2018


End of Document