When a treaty is not a treaty
Chicago Daily Herald
May 13, 2018 Sunday
WEB EditionNC1 EditionNC2 EditionNC3 EditionNM1 EditionNC EditionNC14 EditionMC1 EditionML2 EditionNL1 EditionNC14C EditionNC4 EditionCLFM EditioneBlast Edition


Copyright 2018 Paddock Publications, Inc.
Section: NEWS; Pg. 12
Length: 411 words
Body


When a treaty is not a treaty With President Donald Trump's announcement to pull out of the JCPA Iran deal and previously the Paris Accord, the media and many Democrats act like the world just ended. But when checking facts, these are not treaties but executive actions. President Obama unilaterally decided to bypass the legal Senate process and commit over one trillion American taxpayer dollars to the largest sponsor of terrorism and two economic foes who happen to be two of the largest polluters in the world. 
It is acknowledged that the Paris accord was largely symbolic and that if followed by every country it MAY keep the earth temperature from increasing by a degree in 100 years. In the meantime, China and India had free pass to pollute for decades and a slush fund to dip into. JCPA gave Iran over $150 billion with over $1 billion in cash to stop developing a nuclear weapon. But this deal was only temporary and so flawed that until now Iran has accelerated their bad behavior without consequence. Iran is supporting terrorism across the globe and the facts show Iran lied and has kept spinning centrifuges, exceeding heavy water limits and governments knew yet allowed it to continue for several years. Don't get me wrong, lowering greenhouse emissions and having the U.S. and allies organizing to stop the next possible genocide are great and noble missions. But my question is why the outrage when the sitting president ends bad deals that were never legally ratified treaties, yet costing Americans over a trillion dollars, in order to get all the players back to the table and get a better deal for America and by extension the world? Tony Atkins Wheaton A tribute in blue lights The Bloomingdale Police Department is encouraging all of its residents to show their support for our police officers, as well as honor the fallen officers who have made the ultimate sacrifice, including our own fallen officer, Ray Murrell, by participating in the "Light Up Our Community" event during National Police Appreciation Week (May 13 – May 19) by replacing their exterior porch lights or front window light with a blue bulb. We would really like to see our entire community lit up in blue as a show of support and gratitude to those who have taken the oath to serve and protect our community, and it would be a fitting tribute to all police during National Police Appreciation Week. Frank Giammarese, Director of Public Safety Bloomingdale Police Department

Load-Date: May 14, 2018


End of Document