WHEN THE GAMES GAVE WAY TO TERRORISM, AND DEATH
 The Philadelphia Inquirer
DECEMBER 1, 2000 Friday SF EDITION


Copyright 2000 Philadelphia Newspapers, LLC  All Rights Reserved


Section: FEATURES WEEKEND; Pg. W03
Length: 565 words
Byline: Carrie Rickey, INQUIRER MOVIE CRITIC
Body


Truth is stronger than fiction, as anyone who's seen Apollo 13 can testify. In a similar vein, the superlative documentary thriller One Day in September deploys news footage to reconstruct the drama of the 1972 Munich Olympics, where eight Palestinian terrorists took Israeli athletes hostage in an epochal bungle that cost 11 Israeli heroes, five Arab terrorists, and one German police officer their lives. The film breaks news in that it confirms German collusion in spiriting the three surviving terrorists to Libya.
Stronger still is that by incorporating the voices of eyewitnesses, survivors, and the one living Arab terrorist, Kevin Macdonald's spellbinding chronicle hears the historical repercussions that echo down to contemporary geopolitics.
What represented for the host Germans and the International Olympic Committee a permanent bloodstain on the "Games of Peace" and for the Israelis a national tragedy, was, for the Palestinians, a triumph. As terrorist Jamal Al Gashey, his face blurred so he is not identifiable, explains: Munich was the international stage where the Palestinian cause made its historic debut.
While Macdonald's chronicle sympathizes with the Israelis and implicitly condemns German and IOC incompetence, its power as a documentary resides in how compellingly it depicts the irony of how the event ultimately helped gain sympathy for Palestinians.
Many remember the Munich Olympics as the conclave where Olga Korbut and Mark Spitz won hearts and medals. Macdonald contextualizes Munich as the place where Israeli fencing coach Andre Spitzer, one of those killed, seized the opportunity to befriend Lebanese athletes, whose country was at war with his own.
Spitzer's widow, Ankie, today an Israeli correspondent for Dutch television, warmly evokes his idealism at Munich, a city only kilometers from German death camps where so many Jews lost their lives during World War II.
In hosting the Munich Games, Germany had hoped finally to escape the dark shadows of fascism, expressly the militaristic Nazi pageantry that was the 1936 Berlin Olympiad. Thus, the police force at the 1972 Olympics was unarmed, which made the Olympic Village all the more vulnerable to terrorist infiltration.
Using footage from the 1973 Olympic documentary Visions of Eight, Macdonald evokes the sideburned, shag-haired athletes who made history on the eve of the Munich massacre: Korbut twirling on the balance beams, Spitz breaking seven world swimming records to win seven gold medals, the Soviet basketball team edging the United States in a disputed overtime. What better place than this pageant of nationalistic pride for the disenfranchised to stage their own play for statehood?
Macdonald's film brilliantly telescopes the '70s, an era when every physical action had its equal and opposite political reaction. His is a complex, resonant glimpse at an incident that still resounds.
Carrie Rickey's e-mail address is crickey@phillynews.com  
ONE DAY IN SEPTEMBER * * * 1/2 Produced by John Battsek and Arther Cohn, directed by Kevin Macdonald, music by Alex Heffes, distributed by Sony Pictures Classics.
Running time: 1 hour, 32 mins.
Herself..........Ankie Spitzer
Himself..........Jamal Al Gashey
Himself..........Gerald Seymour
Himself..........Hans-Dietrich Genscher
Himself..........Zvi Zamir
Parent's guide: R (graphic violent images)
Showing at: Ritz at the Bourse and Ritz Sixteen/NJ

Notes

Review: Film

Load-Date: February 5, 2002


End of Document