When a PLO terrorist is brought to justice
Christian Science Monitor (Boston, MA)
January 8, 1988, Friday


Copyright 1988 The Christian Science Publishing Society
Section: Arts and Leisure; Pg. 20
Length: 964 words
Byline: Arthur Unger
Dateline: New York
Highlight: Issues are probed in well-written, well-acted CBS drama Sunday
Body

Terrorist on Trial: The US vs. Salim Ajami
CBS, Sunday, 8-11 p.m. Stars: Ron Leibman, Sam Waterston, Robert Davi.  Writers: Richard Levinson and William Link. Director: Jeff Bleckner. Executive producer: George Englund.
Is there any justification in any society for the deliberate killing of defenseless civilians?  That is the seemingly simple, but actually complex, question that is probed in this earnest, many-layered, well-meaning drama of shocking immediacy.
''Terrorist on Trial'' tries hard to be an incisive study of the quandary in which civilized nations may find themselves in trying to judge the guilt or innocence of terrorists who murder civilians.
West Germany is facing such a problem right now in the trial of Abbas Ali Hamadei, charged with smuggling explosives and participating in kidnappings in Lebanon.
And the United States will be facing it shortly, if its request for Mr. Hamadei's extradition, to stand trial here on murder charges stemming from a 1985 airplane hijacking, are honored. Other cases will undoubtedly arise in the future, as more and more sophisticated methods are used to capture terrorists, including, perhaps, such questionable methods as kidnapping.
But instead of focusing on the facts of the case, the script, by the superb writing team of Richard Levinson and William Link, jumps right into what might be considered the more meaningful aspects of the case - the overall moral implica-tions.
As a result, the drama gives short shrift to its sensitive and detailed analysis of the case at hand, the motivations and background of this particular terrorist. (The program, by the way, is dedicated to the recently deceased Emmy winner Richard Levinson.)
In this drama, the US has kidnapped in Lebanon and brought to trial in the US Salim Ajami, a radical ex-PLO leader, who admits responsibility for the murder of five American tourists in Barcelona.  He insists it was a political act in his war against the American people, a war in which he and his radical associates hope to convince the American people that they can never live in peace ''until we have a homeland.''
The killings were a way of making the world pay attention, he insists, although his own lawyer decides that there are other motives, such as an ego that demands that he take ''credit'' for the killings, even though he might not have been responsible, and his overriding desire for vengeance for the killing of his own family.
Despite the fact that Ajami is played by Robert Davi as a totally hateful, vengeful, and disturbed character, who may not even be a Palestinian, a strong case is made for the Palestinian position in the course of the trial.
But a stronger case is made by the prosecuting attorney, played with refreshing directness by Sam Waterston. The US position is that this country cannot allow atrocities to be committed simply to enable the aims of a political group to make the evening television news.
Ajami has misgivings about defending himself at all, but finally agrees to allow a Jewish lawyer to act as his counsel.
''The system only works,'' the lawyer-professor tells his students, ''if the worst of us gets the defense he is entitled to.''
The lawyer, played with a kind of charmingly good-humored obsession by Ron Leibman, must cope with the mixed attitudes of his own student helpers and the antagonism of the public and the Jewish organizations that try to pressure him to withdraw from the case.  But he persists.
Although the major actors in this drama turn in impeccable performances, I had the feeling throughout that the polemic took precedence over the dramatic aspects. Most of the minor roles were given routine readings, and, except for the court testimony of one of the survivors of the attack, there was little emotional impact.
The special legal adviser for this program was Harvard Law School professor Alan Dershowitz, who has defended many unpopular clients in his well-publicized career.
Although the script includes a few reservations about the professor/lawyer's status, Mr. Dershowitz seems to have made certain that this figure nevertheless emerges as the major hero, even though it is clear that, in addition to his admirable principles, there is an element of grandstanding (''Think of the book he'll get out of this'') and a sly understanding of limited risk-taking (''The only plus about defending the indefensible is that no one expects you to win'').
At a press conference on ''Terrorist on Trial,'' Professor Dershowitz had this to say:
''One of the beauties of this script is: In the end, the defense attorney takes the position that the ultimate answer to terrorism is justice…  I hate violence.  I stand for the rule of law.  And to me, that's the best answer to violence and terrorism. I don't believe terrorism is necessary. My family was killed in the Holocaust, and Jews never became terrorists after the Holocaust. …  I don't believe there is an excuse for Arab terrorism, and I don't believe terrorism is neces-sary…
''Were I the actual lawyer in this case, I would work my butt off to get this SOB acquitted and try as hard as I could to show him and the rest of the Arab world that you can get justice in America if you make your argument persuasively. But if you believe Palestinians deserve a homeland, get on television and debate about it. Argue about it. Make your point morally. Don't kill innocent people.''
''Terrorist on Trial'' tries to help the viewer understand both the legal principles involved in the defense of individual terrorists as well as some of the origins of the terrorist acts themselves.
It succeeds better at explaining the legal aspects than it does at explaining the psychological facets.  But it succeeds best as a thought-provoking adventure in presenting real-life controversy as entertainment.

Graphic

 
Picture, Waterston as prosecutor, Davi as terrorist, and Leibman as his attorney


End of Document