When white men commit terrorism and the farce of patriotism
The University Star: Texas State University - San Marcos
January 28, 2016 Thursday


University Wire
Copyright 2016 UWIRE via U-Wire All Rights Reserved
Section: OPINIONS; Pg. 1
Length: 509 words
Byline: Brandon Sams
Body


Earlier this month armed militiamen forcibly occupied federal land on the outskirts of Oregon known as Malheur National Wildlife Refuge. It took law enforcement 26 days to so much as attempt an arrest. The question is: why?
In simple terms, the intersectionality of white privilege and male prerogative grant specific people the confidence and ability to act in ways counter to generally understood norms. The terrorists, or as the media calls them, "militiamen," in Oregon felt invincible, as they expected the system to always work to procure their bodies and beliefs. This caused them to lash out in dominating and self-centered fits of rage and entitlement.
This is known as rancorous politics. When the system does not specifically serve a group the way the group feels it ought to, it feels maligned or cheated. And, in the case of the Bundy boys, terrorists are born.
Thankfully, the occupation has come to an end. Late Tuesday night a violent confrontation ensued between the Oregon terrorist occupiers and state and federal law enforcement agents ending in the arrest of eight occupiers and the death of another. The men are now facing federal felony charges of conspiracy, which could lead to a maximum of five years in prison.
Justice was served. The end. Right? Not necessarily.
Many questions are still left unanswered. For instance, when black and brown people walk the streets protesting the illegal execution of men, women and children, they are often met with threats, tear gas and arrest for simply invoking their First Amendment freedoms. Yet the reaction to the Oregon terrorists is quite different.
These hypocrites exalt the law as if it is immutable and unchangeable, yet deride the government as the impetus for all the woes of society. The cognitive dissonance and simultaneous reliance on two contradictory ideas is apparent and the racism is palpable.
Patience is a virtue and there is integrity in restraint. When these things are not applied equally or equitably however, there's a problem. These men were given 26 days to make themselves at home-literally.
They were allowed to freely leave, pick up goods from the post office and come back to the wildlife refuge.
Let's play role reversal. A group of armed Muslims come together and forcibly take over federal land. It would take law enforcement agents maybe a day at most to kill them all. The media would be painting this as another attack by radical Islam and conservative outlets would be vicious. Easily.
For some reason, when a bunch of white Christians do this, they're called patriots and are allowed to talk to the sheriff and receive packages, though mostly filled with dildos. The principle of the matter remains: there's a difference here.
No one's saying it's bad to apply restraint and be less violent in approaches to perceived criminality. Perhaps law enforcement and media pundits could apply that same kind of humanity to everyone-not just the select few who most mirror the American archetype. Try remembering that one anthemic clause: "liberty and justice for all."

Load-Date: January 28, 2016


End of Document