WHEN AMERICAN CHURCH LEADERS BUTTRESS P.L.O. TERRORISM
The New York Times
December 1, 1980, Monday, Late City Final Edition


Copyright 1980 The New York Times Company
Section: Section A; Page 18, Column 4; Editorial Desk; Letter
Length: 657 words
Body


To the Editor:
We can agree with the American Jewish Congress that the policy statement on the Middle East recently adopted by the National Council of Churches does not represent an impartial view and that ''partisanship'' based on theological precepts must be acknowledged (letter Nov. 26). However, while this is highly relevant, we question if it is ''far more serious than the issue of the P.L.O.''
In our view, when the N.C.C., a highly significant world body, urges recognition of an international terrorist organization (P.L.O.), this is a development so fraught with dangerous implications that it goes beyond the immediate Middle East ''issues'' themselves.
Let us deal with reality. The P.L.O. Covenant must be taken seriously. Articles 19 and 21 read, ''… the partitioning of Palestine in 1917 and the establishment of Israel is fundamentally null and void… The Palestinian Arab people, in expressing itself through the armed Palestinian revolution, rejects every solution that is a substitute for a complete liberation of Palestine, and rejects all plans that aim at the settlement of the Palestine issue.''
AN-A
In spite of this call to violence by the P.L.O., the governing board of the N.C.C. adopted a policy statement on the Middle East calling on Israel (1) to recognize a sovereign state (i.e., the P.L.O.) apart from the Hashemite Kingdom of J ordan and (2) accept thePalestine Liberation Organization as a partic ipant in the peace negotiations. After months of deliberations, this board determined what ''steps towards peace'' should be taken.  Regrettably, the conclusions arrived at in this statement over look historic realities.
Why does the N.C.C. call on Israel to negotiate if at the same time it concludes that the P.L.O. must first recognize Israel's right to live? If the N.C.C. is convinced that a prerequisite to negotiation with the P.L.O. is the P.L.O.'s acceptance of Israel, should this not be the immediate and urgent objective of the National Council of Churches?
The N.C.C. asks ''both sides to cease hostilities.'' This fails to take into account that to the P.L.O. the very existence of the state of Israel is a ''hostile act'' and is the fundamental aspect of the problem. ''To purge the Zionist presence from Palestine'' (Article 15) is the essence of the P.L.O.'s existence.
The acceptance that authority is vested in those capable of seizing power is perhaps the most ill-advised aspect of the N.C.C.'s policy statement. Thus, the P.L.O., international criminals with a record of violence and extremism, have been given legitimacy and respectabilityas the ''only voice of the Palestinian people.'' This declaration notonly encourag es the enemies of Israel; it is a message to the Palestinian p eople not to seek moderation but to accept the forces ofevil in their midst.
The politics of the problem can be understood, even if they are unacceptable. But what has happened to our sense of morality? Would it not have been inspiring to people everywhere if the National Council of Churches had rejected the premise that internatinal terrorists are the only answer? Would not the cause of the Palestinian Arabs be better served if the N.C.C., representing millions of American Christians, urged them to be brave, to be patient and to reject those who advocate violence, and seek instead leaders with a genuine desire to live in peace with Israel and their own Arab brothers and sisters?
Perhaps the N.C.C. failed to grasp a precious moment in history when its influence could turn the tide. In a world consumed with hate, anger and despair, did the N.C.C. statement serve to help end the ''endless cycle of bloodshed'' that concerns all peace-loving people? Or will it now reinforce the P.L.O. in the belief that its violence is sanctioned, if not blessed?
Surely, all people of good will must seek a more hopeful answer.
IVAN J. NOVICK, National President, Zionist Organization of America, New York, Nov. 21, 1980


End of Document