When Talk Turns to Israel and Terrorism, Congress Does a Kabuki Dance
The Forward
August 10, 2012


Copyright 2012 The Forward Association, Incorporated All Rights Reserved
Section: Forward Forum; Pg. 6
Length: 1133 words
Byline: 
Contact J. J. Goldberg at goldberg@forward.com
Body


An 'honest conversation'  about Israel had an  agenda hidden from even  its congressional hosts.
Too many people give Washington politics  a bum rap. Sure, it can be excruciating  if you're following the issues  and hoping for a certain result. It's frustratingly  predictable, infuriating in its futility  and perhaps even a bit terrifying in its  inability to address the most urgent crises.
If you stand back and watch the choreography,  though, there's a certain poetry to
it. Seeing how the players  group and regroup,  observing the different  ways they go at each  other to score points,  you can find the sort  of subtlety, power and  occasional elegance  usually found only in  ballet and pro football.
Nowhere is the choreography  more compelling  than in debates that touch on  the Middle East. On other issues  taxes,  abortion, energy  people say what  they mean. If they're lying, their foes say  so. When it comes to Israel, terrorism  and Islamic extremism, it's all kabuki and  shadowboxing.
Take, for instance, the July 25 meeting of  the House Homeland Security Committee,  which was devoted to testimony by  the homeland security secretary, Janet  Napolitano. What unfolded, after her dull-as-nails report, was pure poetry. Lawmakers  took turns questioning her, alternating  between Republicans and Democrats,  respectively bludgeoning and flattering her.  The Republicans all asked variations on one  question: Why can't the administration stay  focused on the singular threat of Muslim  extremists? The Democrats all tried changing  the subject to something else: port security,  public alertness programs, Oklahoma  City-style right-wing terrorism  anything.
The exchanges achieved something like  pageantry during one half-hour stretch when  the questioning settled into a metronomic  alternation of white men (Republicans) and  black women (Democrats). Republicans  reached for drama; Democrats spoke soothingly.  You could almost picture weaving  lines of dancers, each with its own melody  playing: Battle Hymn of the Republic (or  was it Dixie?) on one side, Kumbaya  on the other.
The drama peaked when Republican  Paul Broun of Georgia bluntly declared  that political correctness is going to  kill people. Napolitano angrily started to  protest his wording, but Broun shouted  her down. He demanded to know how a  security officers' training program she had  described can prevent attacks without singling  out individuals due to religious or  political beliefs. Then, with sublime lack  of irony, he proceeded to complain about  intelligence profiling that flags gun-owner,  Christian-conservative, pro-life types  as possible threats. That's me, he said.  How are you going to prevent me from  being identified as a terrorist?
For a different sort of choreography, consider  a teach-in held several days earlier in  a different meeting room, sponsored by a  bipartisan group of lawmakers known as  the House Israel Allies Caucus. The title of  the half-day program was Oslo, 20 Years  Later. (It's actually only been 19 years,  but who's counting?) Open to the public, it  was billed as an honest conversation about  the prospects for peace in the Middle East  in light of the failed peace process. That  turned out to be half true. The talk was  largely honest, but the conversation had a  hidden agenda, a sort of soft-shoe shuffle.
The invited speakers were a diverse bunch,  ranging from the iconic Israeli peace activist  Yossi Beilin, the architect of the Oslo peace  accords, to deputy Knesset speaker Danny  Danon, a fiery Likud hardliner, and Ghaith  al-Omari, a former Palestinian Authority  official. Also on the bill were former State  Department negotiator Aaron David Miller,  far-right Jerusalem Post columnist Caroline  Glick and West Bank settler leader Rabbi  Benny Elon, who was, it transpired, the  event's main moving force.
As it turned out, most of the morning  consisted of attacks on the troubled peace  accords as misguided and doomed. These  were coupled with denunciations of a two-state  Israeli-Palestinian compromise  it's  official U. S. and Israeli policy, but Glick and  Danon both insist nobody believes in it   and calls for Israeli annexation of the West  Bank. Miller danced around the question:  He agreed Oslo was a failure, but said compromise  was essential, even if unachievable  anytime soon.
Only Beilin and al-Omari offered full-throated  endorsements of a two-state peace.  But they were there as window dressing,  and they knew it. Both accepted the invitation  expecting a right-wing crowd, hoping  only to win a few converts.
The program was oddly punctuated by  visits from the lawmakers who were the  event's hosts: veteran Jewish Democrat  Eliot Engel of New York, who co-chairs  the Israel Allies Caucus, and fellow Jewish  Democrat Brad Sherman of Los Angeles.  Each took a moment to deliver greetings,  praise Israel's commitment to peace and  willingness to compromise and denounce  Arab intransigence  and then danced off  stage, clueless as to what was transpiring  in their names.
The actual organizer of the event was  an off-campus entity, the International  Israel Allies Caucus Foundation, which  claims parliamentary affiliates in 19 capitals  including Washington. Its founder  and chairman is Elon, a longtime fixture  on Israel's far right. He served three terms  in the Knesset as leader of the Moledet party,  which advocates Israeli annexation of  the territories and voluntary transfer of  Palestinian Arabs to neighboring countries.  He served a stint in
Ariel Sharon's cabinet but quit in 2004 to  protest the planned withdrawal from Gaza.
Today Elon favors letting the Palestinians  stay in their homes but annexing the land  under them and giving them extraterritorial  Jordanian citizenship. He formed the international  allies group as an outgrowth of the  Knesset Christian Allies Caucus, which he  spearheaded in 2004 with the help of prominent  American Christian conservatives. The  American sister caucus has 29 members, 22  Republican and seven Democratic.
It's not clear how many of the 29 lawmakers  know of their Elon affiliation. Sherman  says there isn't one. I am a member of an  organization that is limited to members of  the United States Congress, he told me  during a quick chat in the hallway. This  event is a congressional forum, in a room  reserved by members of Congress, in a  building owned by the U. S. Congress, to  hear from diverse points of view. It is not  an endorsement of any organization.
With that Sherman went back to work.  Back inside the meeting room, Elon was  summing up. He urged the assembled to  work with the millions of Americans who  share our values and thanked them for  coming.
It seems like a common complaint: How  does a congressman avoid getting profiled?

Graphic

 
IMAGE

Load-Date: August 14, 2012


End of Document