When terrorism comes to the comics page
St. Petersburg Times (Florida)
January 3, 2004 Saturday 0 South Pinellas Edition


Copyright 2004 Times Publishing Company
Section: FLORIDIAN; Pg. 1E
Length: 973 words
Byline: LANE DeGREGORY
Body


It wasn't supposed to be funny.
Pearls Before Swine usually is a lighthearted comic strip about a rat and a pig. But  Sunday, creator Stephan Pastis waxed serious. In 10 panels, he drew a TV screen talking about Israeli children being blown up on a bus.
Some readers didn't think the subject should have been in the comics. Others said the strip should have appeared in the Perspective section. And several wanted to know what Pastis was thinking.
"What did he mean by that?" asked Norma Rosso, a 69-year-old great-grandmother who lives in St. Petersburg. "I thought comics were supposed to make you laugh, not cry. Why do we have to see something like this on our funny pages?"
So we asked the artist.
Pastis, 35, lives outside San Francisco with his wife, Staci, and two children, ages 2 and 6. A graduate of the University of California at Berkeley and UCLA Law School, he was a lawyer for nine years, drawing cartoons on the side. Pearls Before Swine made its newspaper debut in January 2002 and now appears in 150 papers.
Here is the text of our interview, conducted by e-mail.
Times: What were you thinking when you wrote that strip?
Pastis: More than anything, I think, it's a commentary on how desensitized we all are to some of the horrible things that are done to people. The media just cite statistics. I think we forget sometimes that these are real people, just like us.
I suppose that my being a dad of two young kids has to have an effect on me and was probably a big part of that.
Times: Why did you write it?
Pastis: When it comes to what inspires a strip, for me anyway, it's never as direct as some people think. You just take in so much every day from what you see and read, and it mixes around in your brain, and then one day you write something. And then sometimes you look back at it and go, "Hey, I must have been thinking about X at the time." But at the time, you don't really know that. At least I don't.
As some people might know, strips are done anywhere from one month to a year before their publication in newspapers. That strip was written many months ago, and I was most likely being influenced by stories that were in the news.
Times: What sort of reaction have you received to it?
Pastis: It has been absolutely unbelievable. In 2 1/2 days, I've received almost 600 e-mails, around six times more e-mails than I've ever received for anything else I've ever done. And they have been the most moving, meaningful, complimentary e-mails I have ever received for any strip.
Of the 600, at least 100 have been from people in Israel, thanking me. Many of those were people who have lost family members to terrorism or come close themselves to being the victim of terrorism. One was from a mother who had lost her son to violence. Most were from parents discussing the fear they have every day when they send their children off to school.
Times: Is this your most controversial strip to date?
Pastis: My e-mail did not reflect much controversy. While I thought there might be a good percentage of complaints, less than 50 of the 600 contained complaints, almost all of which said that I was taking sides on the issue and was not reflecting the Palestinian perspective. Around 10 people said this was inappropriate for the comics page, and one person called me a "complete moron."
Times: Did you expect such a strong reaction?
Pastis: Yes. This was very different than the other strips I did.
Times: In one Internet chat room, readers seemed to see the strip in different ways: Some thought it was pro-Palestine, some pro-Israel, and some a commentary on the media. Do these differing reactions undermine your intent? What do you make of the way different folks read the same thing?
Pastis: It's incredible. I've never seen so many people discussing one of my strips. And I think it's a terrific thing. I think one of the roles of comics is to be relevant to people's lives and get them talking and discussing issues.
As to the many interpretations, I believe the comic must stand on its own, meaning that once it's out there, one person's interpretation is just as valid as mine. I can say what it is I meant by it, but that doesn't mean that's the right interpretation or the only interpretation.
Times: Where do you stand on the Israel-Palestine problem?
Pastis: The death of innocent children on any side, in any conflict, is horrific.
Times: What is the role of comics in our newspapers and in society?
Pastis: I could talk for days on this. Primarily, day in and day out, I think it is to be funny. If you're lucky, those same comics should also be meaningful. But occasionally, I think it's a good thing if those same comics shift things up and make people think. For a comic such as mine, which is usually perceived as humorous, to shift gears that suddenly I think can increase the impact of the strip.
In the past year, I've only done it twice: Once on Memorial Day (where I showed the Vietnam Wall), and once last Sunday. Twice a year is probably the max for me, if that. Ironically, those two strips generated more positive e-mail by far than anything else.
Times: Is it okay for comics to espouse a political view?
Pastis: Well sure, Doonesbury and Boondocks do it all the time. But mine was not a political strip.
Times: Do comics have to be appropriate for children to read?
Pastis: I don't know why some people say the entire comic section must be intended for kids. Historically, that would eliminate all of Krazy Kat (the greatest strip of all time, in my opinion), many of the strips reflecting the deep anxiety and depression of Charlie Brown in the mid '50s, the unbelievably moving Doonesbury strips about the bombing of Cambodia/Vietnam in the early '70s and the terrific  Bloom County strips that showed what cosmetic companies were doing to animals in the '80s. And those were four of the greatest strips ever produced.

Graphic

 
DRAWING, United Features Syndicate; PHOTO; These are the opening panels of last Sunday's Pearls Before Swine, which was written many months ago, cartoonist Stephan Pastis says. He says he was likely influenced by stories in the news then.; Stephan Pastis

Load-Date: January 3, 2004


End of Document