WHEN DIPLOMATS ARE SIMPLY TOO DIPLOMATIC
St. Louis Post-Dispatch (Missouri)
September 30, 1990, SUNDAY, THREE STAR Edition


Copyright 1990 St. Louis Post-Dispatch, Inc.
Section: EDITORIAL; Pg. 3B
Length: 549 words
Byline: Thomas Eagleton Column
Body


We may have found the fall guys for the Iraq-Kuwait conflict. First, some background. During the 1980s, Iraq and Iran were deadlocked in one of the bloodiest wars of modern times. Our policy was to do our best (mostly by sharing intelligence) to keep our ferocious enemy Iran from winning. We knew Saddam Hussein was a brutal thug.  In the world of realpolitik, however, you take 'em as you find 'em, as we did recently when President Hafez Assad of Syria (''the butcher of Hama'') became our new kissin' cousin. The hope in the '80s was that Saddam was capable of at least partial reformation. At that time, Iran was the greater threat to Middle East stability and the greater source of anti-American terrorism.  This year, tensions between Iraq and Kuwait began to escalate. Iraq made warlike threats against its smaller neighbor and ultimately massed thousands of troops on the border. By late July, the CIA was predicting that the Iraqi mobilizations created a ''high degree of probability of invasion.'' That brings us to the fall guys.  On July 31, Assistant Secretary of State for Mideast Affairs John H. Kelly testified in Congress against the imposition of any economic sanctions against Iraq. When asked if the United States would aid Kuwait if it were attacked, Kelly would only say, ''We have no defense treaty relationship with any gulf country. There is no legal obligation on our part.'' Kelly added, ''We support the security and independence of friendly states,'' but said nothing specifically applicable to Kuwait, where the CIA was already warning about an invasion.
The U.S. ambassador to Iraq, April Glaspie, like Kelly a career diplomat, also had a verbal lapse. Just a couple of days before Kelly's testimony, Glaspie was summoned to a meeting with the Iraqi leader. The United States must choose, said Saddam, between friendship with Iraq or support of Kuwait's ''economic war.'' He threatened terrorism against the United States.  Glaspie listened to the bombast and replied by praising Iraq's efforts to rebuild its economy. Her State Department instructions were to be conciliatory and non-threatening. She states, ''We have no opinion on the Arab-Arab conflicts, like your border agreement with Kuwait.'' Saddam replied that he was ''hoping'' for peace, ''but if we are not able to find a solution, then it will be natural that Iraq will not accept death.'' Glaspie thanked Saddam and said she would be returning to Washington on July 30 (two days before the invasion). She told Saddam she had thought of postponing the trip because of the tension between Iraq and Kuwait, but was sufficiently comforted by the interview with him to go ahead as planned.  Glaspie is in Washington, out of general circulation.  What if the State Department and Glaspie had made clear that an invasion of Kuwait would provoke a military response by the United States? More than likely, the crisis would not have been avoided. Saddam was already over the brink, hell bent to chance fate.  Kelly and Glaspie may take the fall. The truth is that most of the Washington foreign policy establishment - executive and congressional - must share in the blame. Everyone subscribed to the fantasy that we could pander to a poison-gas tyrant and somehow convert him into a Nobel Peace Prize candidate.

Load-Date: October 18, 1993


End of Document