WHEN TERROR STRIKES AT HOME THE TRADE CENTER CONVICTIONS CAN'T RESTORE AMERICANS' FORTRESS MENTALITY.
 The Philadelphia Inquirer
March 6, 1994 Sunday FINAL EDITION


Copyright 1994 Philadelphia Newspapers, LLC  All Rights Reserved


Section: EDITORIAL REVIEW & OPINION; Pg. D01; ANALYSIS
Length: 1325 words
Byline: Terence Samuel, INQUIRER STAFF WRITER
Dateline: NEW YORK
Body


The pictures grew increasingly familiar, but they remained foreign all the same. The bodies, the blood, the chaos and the panic as another deadly act of violence was committed in the name of another political, religious or ideological cause.
Throughout the 1970s and '80s, the horrifying images always seemed to be of other people in other places - Munich, London, Cairo, Beirut.
Then, on Feb. 26, 1993, 1,200 pounds of explosive chemicals ripped a five- story hole in the World Trade Center, shattering the sense of public security and obliterating for Americans the notion that terrorism was mostly a foreign policy issue.
This time, the frantic screams and the pleas for help were coming from American voices. The soot-covered faces of survivors being carried out were those of the folks next door.
Suddenly, the spilled blood was flowing in familiar streets.
"Every day I come to work, I worry that they are going to do it again," said Vito DeLeo, a 33-year-old operating engineer at the World Trade Center, who saw the fireball of the blast come through a wall at him last February. On Friday, he was having pizza for lunch in the same parking garage where the bomb went off. He now wears a hearing aid in his left ear to compensate for an eardrum ruptured by the blast, which also left him with cuts and bruises.
"The World Trade Center is not what it used to be," he said. "There are so many security checkpoints. It's not any fun. It's not a free society anymore."
Said Raymond W. Kelly, who was New York City's police commissioner at the time: "We used to have a feeling that we were invulnerable to attack, and the World Trade Center changed that."
The bombing posed a series of questions about U.S. susceptibility to terrorist attacks and whether terrorists, in the search for suitable targets, were now more inclined to exploit that vulnerability than before.
"New York is the capital of the world," Kelly said. "If you want to make a statement, it is a very inviting target. Are we seeing a pattern? It is too early to say that."
A year of debate, the uncovering of a second bombing plot last summer and Friday's conviction of four men charged with the Trade Center attack have done little to resolve those larger questions.
And last week's shooting attack on a van full of Hasidic Jews on the Brooklyn Bridge has served only to more urgently restate the questions. The accused is a Lebanese national. Investigators so far have refused to discuss motives for the shooting, but coming four days after a Jewish extremist slaughtered at least 30 praying Muslims in a West Bank mosque, it looked alarmingly like a response to the violence half a world away.
Kelly, now a professor of public policy at New York University, said that aside from the van attack, the potential of terrorism was now a fact of life for Americans, particularly for New Yorkers.
"The central questions are 'Are we vulnerable?' and the answer is yes; 'Did things change because of the World Trade Center?' and the answer is yes."
Kelly said the ease of travel in the United States makes it difficult to eliminate that vulnerability.
And it is hard not to note that Americans can hardly expect to remain immune from international terrorism when Americans contribute to it: While the Brooklyn Bridge suspect was born in Lebanon and came to the United States in 1984, the West Bank killer, Baruch Goldstein, was born in Brooklyn and moved to Israel in 1982.
*
There is little likelihood that any administration would change U.S. foreign policy in an attempt to forestall terrorist attacks; it would be perceived as giving in to blackmail. Many people, therefore, believe that the extent to which the United States becomes a new theater for acts of terrorism depends on the law enforcement response.
Friday's verdicts - four militant Muslim fundamentalists were convicted on a total of 38 conspiracy, assault and various explosives charges - left law enforcement officials all but gleeful.
"It's a great day for law enforcement, a great day for New York City, and a great day for America," said Police Commissioner William Bratton.
Bill Gavin, the new head of the FBI's New York office, was equally emphatic. "There are two conclusions that can be reached with this verdict," he said. "One: International terrorism has in fact reached the shores of the United States. Two: The justice system of the United States is up to combating that threat."
But catching terrorists afterward does not prevent the horrific acts in the first place.
"Swift justice and harsh punishment is not going to prevent an act like this from happening again," said Harvey Kushner, a professor of criminal justice at Long Island University, talking about the World Trade Center bombing.
*
The convictions in the Trade Center trial will be of little deterrence, Kushner said. And Americans should take little comfort in the outcome of the trial, because the bombers succeeded in delivering their message, he said.
"If you are looking at it in terms of who won, the answer is that they won," Kushner said.
Earlier in the week, police arrested Rashad Baz, a 28-year-old Lebanese, for firing on the van of Hasidic students. The shooting left one student brain-dead, a second clinging to life with a bullet in his head, and a third recovering from abdominal injuries.
New York Mayor Rudolph W. Giuliani called the attack a "vicious act of hostility" and took great pains to avoid characterizing it as an act of terrorism. But he gave the clear impression that the city wanted the arrest to be a message to those contemplating acts of terror.
"The massive and swift response of our city has sent a signal that our streets are not open to bloodshed, and our communities will not tolerate hatred," Giuliani said.
"We are saying as a community, that if you violate us, and this shooting violated every one of us, the largest and most effective police department in the United States will use every lawful technique to track you down."
*
At the same time that Giuliani was eschewing any discussion that the van attack was part of some terrorist plot, he and Bratton tried to calm New Yorkers with assurances that the Police Department was on highest alert
because of the Trade Center bombing anniversary, the end of the trial and the West Bank massacre.
Jewish leaders said they were taking comfort from the quick arrests in both the Trade Center explosion and the bridge shooting.
"There are no guarantees that an arrest in this case will end violence here in New York," said Assemblyman Dov Hikind, a Jewish activist from Brooklyn. "But a very powerful message has been sent."
There is a sense that those clinging to the theory that a message has been
sent are doing so out of optimism, rather than fact.
City Councilman Noach Dear, who represents the part of the city with the largest concentration of synagogues and yeshivas, said he, too, believed a message has been sent to potential terrorists.
But, he said, one has been received as well.
"Obviously, the United States is no longer immune from terrorists' attacks," he said. He said that already the atmosphere has changed, with many synagogues and schools installing security equipment and hiring security details. Strangers are observed more carefully, he said.
"For the last 10 years when I visited cities in Europe, I couldn't get into a synagogue unless they could identify who I was, and it had never happened where another fellow Jew can't go into a synagogue," Dear said. "I was flabbergasted when I was frisked by five people in a Rome synagogue and there were guards sitting out there with machine guns ready to shoot. And I realize that this has now traveled across the water to the United States."
Rabbi Joseph Spielman, who heads the Crown Heights Jewish Coalition, said the quick arrests in all incidents so far will help curb the spread of international terrorism in the United States.
"A plant grows where you let it grow," he said. "If they nip it in the bud, it'll be fine."

Graphic

 
PHOTO;

PHOTO (3)
1. The World Trade Center explosion shattered a cherished American illusion:
It can't happen here. "Every day I come to work, I worry that they are going
to do it again," said a man who works at the building. (Associated Press
, JOE TABACCA)
2-3. After Baruch Goldstein, left, killed West Bank worshipers, many feared
revenge. Days later, a vanload of Brooklyn Jews was shot at. Rashad Baz was
charged, although authorities did not discuss motives. (Associated Press, RON
FREHM)

Load-Date: October 21, 2002


End of Document