WHEN TERROR THREATENS: WHAT U.S. HAS LEARNED
The New York Times
December 2, 1984, Sunday, Late City Final Edition


Copyright 1984 The New York Times Company
Section: Section 1; Part 1; Page 1, Column 3; Foreign Desk; Series
Length: 1971 words
Byline: Terence Smith
Series: Counterterrorism: A War in the Shadows; First of four articles
Dateline: WASHINGTON, Dec. 1
Body


Shortly before the Nov. 6 election, American intelligence detected what officials describe as hard evidence that Shiite Moslem terrorists planned to attack yet another American installation in Lebanon.
The target this time, officials said, was the American Ambassador's hillside residence in Yarze, a Beirut suburb overlooking the Mediterranean. ''We knew who was planning the attack and generally where in West Beirut they were located,'' said Robert B. Oakley, the director of the State Department's Office of Counterterrorism and Emergency Planning.
Little was written about it at the time, but American officials point to the swift response to the threat as an example of what has to be done if the United States is to counter the continuing threat of international terrorism.
Armed with advance intelligence, American and Lebanese forces mobilized. Half the American staff was evacuated, the Ambassador was secretly flown out of the country, the perimeter defense at the residence was reinforced and pushed outward, antiaircraft weapons were put on the grounds and the air lanes above the residence were closed to all traffic.
It is impossible to know for sure whether these measures blocked the terrorists from making good on their announced plans to hit another American target before election day, but the fact is that Nov. 6 passed quietly. The only scare occurred about a week later when a private Saudi Arabian plane strayed over the residence and nervous guards opened fire.
The sense of relief in the State Department the day after the election was palpable. ''It's not that the danger is over - it isn't,'' Mr. Oakley said. ''But in this case, at least, effective preventive action succeeded in blocking an attack.''
Ever since a truck laden with explosives devastated the United States Embassy near East Beirut on Sept. 20, counterterrorism has been a top item on the official agenda in Washington. In fact, the Sept. 20 bombing had at least one result that the terrorists never intended: It seems to have galvanized the Reagan Administration, the bureaucracy and Congress into concerted action against the continuing threat of international terrorism.
In the 10 weeks since the embassy bombing - the third terrorist attack on an American installation in Lebanon in 18 months - Administration officials say they have taken specific steps to improve intelligence, enhance the protection of American embassies and diplomats abroad and increase the readiness of secret counterterror teams that are trained to rescue hostages, storm hijacked airliners and break up terrorist cells overseas.
Secretary of State George P. Shultz has made counterterrorism a top priority by conducting personal security inspections of embassies he visits on trips abroad and demanding daily status reports on conditions at high-risk embassies. In addition, Congress moved quickly after the attack to adopt antiterror legislation and authorize $356 million in the current budget to enhance security abroad.
Interagency teams have visited 22 embassies in the Middle East, Latin America and elsehwere to try to identify the most vulnerable. Eleven embassies are being built around the world with blast-absorbing walls and new technological devices to increase security. The National Academy of Sciences is working with the State Department to design a prototype embassy of the future that is both functional and secure.
 
New Attitude Reported
''We've accomplished more in the last two months than we have in a long time,'' said Mr. Oakley. ''The Sept. 20 bombing was a watershed. There is a completely different attitude now about the problem, a kind of interagency and intergovernmental cooperation that didn't exist before. The danger is still there, but we're more alert.''
At the same time, interviews with top Government officials indicate that there remains a basic policy split in the Administration on whether the United States should use military force to pre-empt or retaliate against terrorist attacks.
Mr. Shultz has made the case for pre-emptive and retaliatory action in recent speeches, arguing that the United States must be prepared to use force lest it become ''the Hamlet of nations, worrying endlessly over whether and how to respond.''
Key Administration officials disagree with the Secretary, however.
Vice President Bush and Secretary of Defense Caspar W. Weinberger have both spoken out against the Shultz approach. The Joint Chiefs of Staff are also said to oppose it.
''You don't want to shoot a gun into a crowded theater in the hope that somebody's there who might have done something,'' Mr. Weinberger said recently, echoing an argument made earlier by Mr. Bush.
 
Reagan Has Reservations
President Reagan has not come down conclusively on either side of the argument, but he has repeatedly expressed his reservations about using force. ''You don't want to just carelessly go out and maybe kill innocent people,'' Mr. Reagan said in an interview last week in response to a question about why the United States had not retaliated for terrorist actions. ''Then you're as bad as the terrorists.''
Although the policy dispute is unresolved, many officials and private experts on terrorism express the belief that the United States is closer today to taking pre-emptive or retaliatory action than it has ever been.
''We're moving toward a consensus on using force to deal with terrorism,'' one senior official said. ''We're not there yet, but we are close. For one thing, our intelligence is better now, so pre-emption becomes a more achievable thing to do.''
Militarily, the United States has been poised for some time to make a retaliatory or pre-emptive strike. In the Middle East, for instance, the 90,000-ton, nuclear-powered aircraft carrier Eisenhower has been on station in the eastern Mediterranean for two months. Its aircraft could easily strike targets in Lebanon should the political decision be made in Washington.
Brian Jenkins, a counterterrorism expert for the Rand Corporation, also believes the moment of retaliation is not far off. ''There's a red line somewhere in all of this,'' he said in a telephone interview, ''a line that, if crossed, will produce a response of the kind Shultz is talking about. Is it after 5 embassy bombings? Or 25? I don't know.
 
Concern About 2 A.M. Decisions
''My concern is that we will cross that line before thinking through our options,'' Mr. Jenkins said. ''I'm afraid we'll end up with the kind of decisions that are made by Presidents in their pajamas at 2 A.M.''
A similar concern expressed by Robert H. Kupperman, a terrorism specialist at the Georgetown Center for Strategic and International Studies.
''There are the gravest risks in following the Shultz scenario too literally,'' he said in an interview in his office here.
''Just imagine what might have happened if we had retaliated after the bombing of the Marine barracks by sending a team into Baalbek,'' he said. Baalbek is the suspected headquarters in Lebanon of the Hezballah, or Party of God, a militant Shiite Moslem group that American intelligence has identified as being involved in all three of the bombings in Lebanon.
''Suppose four or five of our team had been caught, tried and hanged,'' he continued. ''Then we'd have to raise the ante militarily, the Soviets would match it and the situation would escalate very quickly.''
Effective retaliation, Mr. Kupperman said, would require a careful conditioning of public and international opinion in advance, along with consultation with other nations. ''Shultz is laying the groundwork for that now,'' he said.
 
Talks With Allies Begin
William E. Colby, the former Director of Central Intelligence, said he was surprised that the Administration had not retaliated already for the attacks in Lebanon. ''We have the tools to do it and we've identified the target,'' he said. ''I think public opinion would support it 100 percent.''
On the international scene, the record of concerted action against terrorism is spotty at best.
At the economic meeting in London last June, the seven leading industrialized democracies pledged themselves to a new effort to fight terrorism. An ''experts group'' held a follow-up meeting in London in September, and American officials say intelligence-sharing and coordination has improved, especially with Britain and Italy.
A prime example of international cooperation came last week when the Italian police rounded up seven Moslem terrorists who were reportedly plotting to blow up the American Embassy in Rome.
The Italians acted in response to a tip from the Swiss authorities, who had arrested a man in Zurich as he tried to board a plane for Rome with four pounds of explosives. In the man's pocket they found a note with the names and address of his accomplices in Rome. When the Italian police moved in on the group in a hideout near Rome, they found more explosives and photographs and maps of the embassy grounds.
 
A Warning at Dinner
The first word of the roundup reached Maxwell M. Rabb, the American Ambassador to Rome, as he was eating dinner in a restaurant the day after Thanksgiving. It came in the form of an urgent call from Marcello Monarca, the Rome police chief.
''He wanted me to be very careful because he didn't know for sure how many terrorists were involved,'' the Ambassador recalled in a telephone interview. ''It was a prime example of two governments working together to do something about terrorism,''
But a coordinated response to terrorism, especially state-supported terrorism, still elludes the alliance. This was underscored recently when the United States and France were unable to agree on measures against the Libyan Government of Col. Muammar el-Qaddafi, whom Washington accuses of fostering subversion and terrorism worldwide.
The latest French-American consultations on the subject followed a week in which Egypt revealed a bungled Libyan plot to assassinate a former Libyan Prime Minister in Cairo and in which France was forced to admit that Libya had reneged on its pledge to remove its troops from Chad. Top American officials, meeting with Foreign Minister Claude Cheysson in Washington, argued that the Libyan actions reinforced the need for Western nations to ostracize the Qaddafi Government with sanctions and other means.
 
U.S. Officials Disappointed
The French were not persuaded. Mr. Cheysson emerged from his meetings to tell reporters that France wanted normal relations with Libya, from which it obtains substantial supplies of crude oil. The logic of the American argument, the Foreign Minister said, could lead to military action against Libya that ''no one would recommend.''
The French reaction was a keen disappointment to American officials dealing with counterterrorism. ''The Libyans have been identified as terrorists for a long time,'' one official said. ''But the Europeans have their own agenda with Libya and nothing, it seems, is going to upset it.''
The lack of a coordinated Western strategy for dealing with state-supported terrorism is a major problem, in the view of Benjamin Netanyahu, the chief Israeli delegate to the United Nations. Mr. Netanyahu is one of the founders of the Jonathan Institute, a joint United States-Israeli organization with offices in Washington that is named after his brother, Jonathan Netanyahu, the Israeli commander of the raid to rescue hijacking hostages at Entebbe airport in Uganda in July 1976.
''The Western nations have enormous economic and political clout if they could ever act together,'' he said. ''When a country is known to support terrorism, like Libya, the Western nations should isolate it by cutting off trade and closing their ports to them.
''Nations that sponsor terrorism,'' he said, ''have to realize there is a cost to waging this clandestine war.''
 
NEXT: How new security measures are changing the look and feel of embassies.

Graphic

 
Photo of American Ambassador Maxwel M. Rabb entering Rome police headquarters; Photo of Rome Police Chief Marcello Monarca being questioned by reporters; Photo of Robert B. Oakley


End of Document