WHERE WILL THE LIBYAN EPISODE LEAD?;
FURTHER INTO A TRAP
The New York Times
April 27, 1986, Sunday, Late City Final Edition


Copyright 1986 The New York Times Company
Section: Section 4; Page 23, Column 2; Editorial Desk; Op-Ed
Length: 767 words
Byline: By Gary Sick; Gary Sick, a member of the National Security Council staff in the Carter Administration, is author of ''All Fall Down: America's Tragic Encounter With Iran.''
Body


The number of terrorist incidents directed against American citizens living, working or traveling outside the United States has increased dramatically in the past three years. More Americans have been killed or wounded in such attacks in the past 30 months than in the previous 13 years.
The significance of these figures should not be exaggerated. What is most remarkable about the statistics on terrorism is the relative immunity that Americans have enjoyed for so long. Of the 812 incidents of interna-tional terrorism in 1985 - a very bad year - fewer than 20 involved Americans. A total of 23 Americans were killed in such incidents - about one-fourth the number who die each year as a result of being struck by lightning. Terrorism may be immensely ugly and menacing, but for Americans it is still extraordinarily uncommmon.
Still, the upsurge of American casualties, particularly in the Middle East, is an unmistakable and disturbing trend. Is it likely to get better or worse? Can American policies make a difference?
Terrorism is as ancient as politics. The words ''thug,'' ''assassin'' and ''zealot'' originated with well-organized extremist movements that predated by many centuries Muammar el-Qaddafi, Abu Nidal and the Ayatollah Ruhollah Khomeini. In the future as in the past, those who hold the existing order in utter contempt will perpetually rediscover the power of a tiny group to intimidate and frighten those whom they cannot persuade. There will always be desperate individuals who conclude that their cause can be redeemed only by acts of violent, often random, defiance. Like vice or corruption, terrorism can be fought, managed, controlled; but it cannot be eradicated.
Over the next generation, terrorism is likely to get worse rather than better. One of the most obvious reasons is simple demographics. Today 60 percent of the population of the third world is under 20 years old. There is no historical precedent for a demographic eruption of this magnitude, so predictions about its consequences must be made with caution. However, one effect may well be a substantial increase in political instability and extremist activity.
The social ferment experienced by America and other industralized countries in the 1960's and 1970's when the post-World War II ''baby boom'' generation was coming of age is still a vivid memory. If that experience is any guide, the immensely larger population wave about to sweep over the less prosperous and often politically unstable countries of the developing world may prove to be the most important single fact of international politics between now and the year 2000.
The policies of the United States or any other nation can do nothing to alter the demographic facts. However, it would be foolhardy to pursue policies that fail to take account of the longer-term implications of these new realities.
In recent years, American policy in the Middle East has moved steadily in the direction of increased engagement as a partisan - even a combatant - in the conflicts of the region. First in Lebanon and more lately in Libya, the United States has injected itself not as an intermediary or peacemaker but as a direct participant in regional disputes.
Most Americans exult at sending a ''message'' to Colonel Qaddafi. But the syntax of violence is as ambiguous as that of diplomacy. The message we think we are sending to Colonel Qaddafi may not be the message that is being received by a new generation in the Middle East that is being conditioned to regard the United States as a distant, indifferent bully.
Moreover, the policy is not working. On the contrary, the backlash has forced the United States to curtail or terminate its official presence in Lebanon, in Libya and now in the Sudan, in addition to the earlier withdrawal from Iran. Private firms and individual Americans have followed suit. This exodus of American influence and presence from the Middle East is, of course, precisely what the terrorists hoped to achieve. That is the terror trap: succumbing to our own sense of outrage, we do ourselves more damage than the terrorists could ever hope to accomplish by themselves.
The Middle East policies of three previous administrations have been discarded almost casually in favor of a policy of military retribution. The new posture is undeniably popular with the American people, but public responsibility for foreign affairs is not a popularity contest. In this moment, as we brace for another round of terrorist escalation, there is perhaps still time for a sober reassessment of our national priorities and objectives in the Middle East.

Graphic

 
Drawing


End of Document