Where Manchin and Capito stand on terrorism/gun legislation
Charleston Gazette-Mail
June 24, 2016, Friday


Copyright 2016 Charleston Newspapers
Section: NEWS; Pg. P2A
Length: 782 words
Byline: David Gutman, Staff writer
Body


For the second time this week, the U.S. Senate voted on two proposals Thursday intended to bar suspected terrorists from buying guns. For the second time this week, both proposals appear to be dead after each party voted for one of the two proposals, but largely withheld its support from the competing one.
"We need to keep guns out of the hands of terrorists, while also protecting the rights of law-abiding Americans and ensuring they receive due process, said Ashley Berrang, a spokeswoman for Sen. Shelley Moore Capito, R-W.Va.
"I will always fight to protect our Second Amendment and due process rights and against any government overreach and infringement, said Sen. Joe Manchin, D-W.Va., "but I will also fight to prevent radical Islamic terrorists from obtaining weapons.
If it seems West Virginia's two senators agree, why did they vote on opposite sides of Thursday's amendments?
Democrats supported stricter proposals, arguing that they were necessary to keep guns from getting into the hands of possible terrorists. Republicans supported looser ones, noting that terrorist watch lists are filled with people who should not be on them and that Democratic proposals gave no due process for those people.
Senate legislation requires 60 votes to clear a filibuster, necessitating significant bipartisan support, something that none of the four amendments could muster.
The four amendments would only apply to gun sales from licensed dealers, which require background checks. Earlier this week the Senate defeated a proposal to expand background checks to private sales, like those made over the internet or by unlicensed dealers at gun shows. Both Manchin and Capito voted against expanding background checks, although Manchin has long supported a more narrow expansion of background checks than the one offered this week.
Here is a rundown of the four proposals this week intended to bar people on terrorism watch lists from buying guns, and how West Virginia's two senators voted on each.
Feinstein Amendment
Sponsored by Sen. Dianne Feinstein, D-Calif., it would have let the Justice Department block anyone on the federal terrorist watch list in the previous five years from buying a gun. It was supported by the White House but opposed by Republicans, who noted that it offered no recourse or due process for those who are mistakenly on the terror watch list.
The amendment failed 53-47, with two Republicans voting for it and one Democrat voting against. Manchin voted yes; Capito voted no.
Cornyn Amendment
Sponsored by Sen. John Cornyn, R-Texas, it would notify the Justice Department when someone on the terrorist watch list attempts to buy a gun. The sale would then be blocked for three days while law enforcement goes to a federal judge to present probable cause that the person is or will be involved in terrorist activities. If the judge rules there is probable cause, the gun sale is blocked, if not, it is allowed to go through. Supported by the Republicans and the National Rifle Association, the amendment was opposed by most Democrats who said it made it too difficult to block gun purchases.
With a 53-47 vote, the amendment fell short of the 60 votes necessary to clear a filibuster. Manchin was one of two Democrats to support the measure. Capito also voted for it.
Collins Amendment
Sponsored by Sen. Susan Collins, R-Maine, it was billed as a compromise amendment, but was opposed by the NRA and Collins was only able to attract seven other Republicans to join her, likely dooming the measure.
It would block people on narrower terrorism lists from buying a gun and notify law enforcement when people on the broader watch list buy a gun, allowing them to investigate further. It would allow people who are blocked from buying a gun to appeal in court, with the burden on the government to prove that a person should not have a gun.
A so-called test vote Thursday allowed the amendment to advance, but it garnered only 52 votes, well short of the 60 it will eventually need for passage. Capito voted against the amendment; Manchin voted for it.
Johnson Amendment
Sponsored by Sen. Ron Johnson, R-Wis., it would allow law enforcement to delay the purchase of a gun, rather than block it as was the case in the Collins amendment. Collins told reporters on Thursday that she had 10 additional Republicans to support her amendment before the Johnson amendment was offered.
"People who were on the cusp now have another place to go, Collins told Politico, of the Johnson amendment.
It was defeated 67-31, with every Democrat, including Manchin, voting against it. Capito voted for it.
Reach David Gutman at david.gutman@wvgazettemail.com, 304-348-5119 or follow @davidlgutman on Twitter.

Load-Date: June 24, 2016


End of Document