Where Time, Not Terrorism, Is the Enemy
The New York Times
September 17, 2004 Friday
Late Edition - Final


Copyright 2004 The New York Times Company
Section: Section B; Column 1; Metropolitan Desk; Pg. 1; NYC
Length: 755 words
Byline: By CLYDE HABERMAN
Body


ELEVEN steps down from Eldridge Street, in a room worn with age, two dozen worshipers greeted the Jewish New Year yesterday armed with nothing but prayers.
 No security guard stood watch at the door. No unsightly concrete barriers ringed the sidewalk, as they do outside many Jewish institutions these days -- a sad necessity in an age when Islamic terrorists have made targets of Jews living anywhere and everywhere.
  Instead on this Rosh Hashana, which signaled the start of the Jewish calendar year 5765, worshipers at the struggling Eldridge Street Synagogue on the Lower East Side had only prayers. Why would anyone have thought they might need more than that?
 The only reason was a weird coda to a terror alert last month from the Department of Homeland Security. That was the warning of possible threats to financial bastions like Citigroup, the World Bank and the New York Stock Exchange.
 Oh, and by the way, a newsweekly reported at the time, the counterterrorism types are also worried about the Eldridge Street Synagogue.
 Hello? Citigroup, the stock exchange, the World Bank and the Eldridge Street Synagogue, long past its glory years and drawing maybe 15 worshipers -- 20, tops -- to a typical Sabbath service. Does the phrase ''what's wrong with this picture?'' come to mind?
 Apparently, it was all a misunderstanding. Neither the police nor the synagogue had heard of any specific threat. Other Jewish institutions clearly knew better, too. The mistaken report ''didn't even generate one phone call to ask, 'Are you O.K.?''' said Paul P.E. Bookson, a retired state judge and former state senator who is president of the congregation that forms the synagogue, K'hal Adath Jeshurun with Anshe Lubz.
 ''I don't know if I'm reassured by that, or whether it shows their lack of interest,'' Mr. Bookson said with a laugh during an interview before the start of Rosh Hashana.
 With good reason, supposed terrorism threats concern Eldridge Street less than the challenge of making it through yet another day, another week, another month.
 The neo-Moorish building, a faded beauty declared a national historic landmark in 1996, had its heyday long ago. That was in the early decades after it was completed in 1887, the first great synagogue built on these shores by waves of Jewish immigrants from Eastern Europe.
 No New York neighborhood ever stays the same. Jews moved uptown, or decamped to the suburbs. One by one, synagogues on the Lower East Side closed. Decorative plaques from their Holy Arks, the often-ornate cabinets where Torah scrolls are stored, adorn a wall at Eldridge Street -- silent tribute to what once was.
 Eldridge Street itself hung on, but barely, an anomaly on a block that became part of the expanding Chinatown. The synagogue fell into serious disrepair, a waterlogged mess. As far back as the 1950's, the shrinking congregation retreated from the sumptuous main sanctuary to a study hall downstairs, the same modest room where worshipers gathered yesterday.
 FOR the last 18 years, bringing the building back from near death has been the mission of a nonsectarian group called the Eldridge Street Project. The worst is over, said Amy E. Waterman, the project's executive director.
 Thanks to private donations and government money, the structural damage has been undone, although years of work remain to restore the sanctuary to anywhere near its former glory. Cultural and educational programs lure 20,000 visitors a year: schoolchildren on class trips, Europeans interested in architecture, suburban Jews looking to connect briefly with their families' past.
 ''People talk about nostalgia as a cheap emotion,'' Ms. Waterman said, ''but pleasant memories of childhood and one's grandparents are good things.'' And who knows? The bizarre terrorism report last month might even prove a blessing of sorts. When the inevitable pitches for money are made, she said, it is possible that ''people may pay more attention.''
 That's for the physical part of the synagogue. Its soul, the congregation, is another matter.
 The numbers, as the Rosh Hashana service showed, are hardly brilliant. But they seem to have stabilized, said Mr. Bookson, whose grandfather was a member in 1887. Neighborhood newcomers, including some young Jews, offer a measure of hope, reflected in a banner at the synagogue that says, ''Your arrival is our survival.''
 Besides, it was the New Year, a season of hope, not threats or fears. ''As you see,'' Mr. Bookson said, ''we're still alive.''                                              

http://www.nytimes.com

Load-Date: September 17, 2004


End of Document