Which sanctions on Iran are being traded away?; Obama should clarify nuke negotiations
USA TODAY
June 15, 2015 Monday
FIRST EDITION


Copyright 2015 Gannett Company, Inc. All Rights Reserved
Section: NEWS; Pg. 7A
Length: 508 words
Byline: James S. Robbins
Body


The Obama administration seems ready to give Iran a "get out of sanctions free card" despite its support for terrorism, its missile program and its human rights violations.
Nuclear-related economic sanctions are the key sticking point in the  negotiations with Iran, set to conclude June 30. Most attention is being focused on how quickly sanctions will be lifted, and on "snap-back," the supposed ability to reimpose sanctions should Iran be caught cheating on the deal.
But exactly which sanctions are being traded away? Presumably, the only sanctions that should be in play are those that relate to the nuclear weapons program. But many others have nothing to do with nuclear arms. They were imposed on Iran to deter missile proliferation, fight state sponsorship of terrorism, and punish human rights violations. None of these issues has been on the table at Geneva, so it follows that none of these sanctions should be lifted. But the Associated Press reports that the White House is going to try to lift at least some of them.
Iran faces many sanctions solely by being on the U.S. list of state sponsors of terrorism.  On May 13, President Obama told Al Arabiya that "Iran clearly engages in dangerous and destabilizing behavior in different countries across the region" and "is a state sponsor of terrorism." Will all the terror-related sanctions stay in place then, or does the White House contemplate removing Iran from this list, as it has recently with Cuba?
The U.S. has also used sanctions to isolate Iran for its human rights record. Obama's Executive Order 13553 from September 2010 imposed sanctions on numerous individuals who were responsible for "the commission of serious human rights abuses" in Iran. Do these people get a free pass under the nuclear deal?
The National Defense Authorization Act of 2012 called out "the entire Iranian banking sector, including the Central Bank of Iran, as posing terrorist financing, proliferation financing, and money laundering risks for the global financial system." Will sanctions under this law remain in force? If not, why?
The Comprehensive Iran Sanctions, Accountability and Divestment Act of 2010 called out the "illicit nuclear activities of the government of Iran, combined with its development of unconventional weapons and ballistic missiles, and its support for international terrorism." It noted that Iran "continues to engage in serious, systematic and ongoing violations of human rights." Does the White House plan to partition the various sanctions from this act to only lift those directly related to Iran's nuclear program?
The Iranians  do not distinguish between any particular types of sanctions. Iranian negotiator Hamid Baeidinejad wants the United Nations to guarantee all sanctions will be lifted because of "incessant threats" from the U.S. Congress to take independent action. The Obama administration needs to clarify publicly exactly which sanctions are being negotiated away, and why.
James S. Robbins  is the author of The Real Custer: From Boy General to Tragic Hero. 

Load-Date: June 15, 2015


End of Document