WHINERS EMIT MORE NOISE THAN HARLEYS
Wisconsin State Journal (Madison, Wisconsin)
December 28, 2009 Monday
ALL EDITION


Copyright 2009 Madison Newspapers, Inc. All Rights Reserved
Section: OPINION; Pg. A10
Length: 371 words
Body


After reading George Atwood's opinion of Harley-Davidson motorcycle, my first thought was narrow-minded and ignorant.
Then I looked at the www.noisefree.org Web site and concluded that these people are a bunch of whiners who are probably offended by the noise of falling snow.
If these people want quiet, then they'll have to move to the country with no neighbors. Anywhere else and they're going to be surrounded by people - and people make noise.
Get used to it, get over it and stop complaining. The noise you're emitting offends me.
- John Tramburg, Oxford
Don't blame riders for stealing your girlfriend
I was taken aback by Sunday's quote from Noise Free America, berating the Harley-Davidson motorcycle.
Over four decades, most of my bikes have been Harleys. It's distressing to be blamed for everything short of male pattern baldness and blocking health care reform.
I'd like to offer a differing theory to explain this man's angst. I think some Harley rider stole his girlfriend.
My bike is heavily modified. In leaving my home for the highway, I ride through an upscale neighborhood. I've never received a warning from law enforcement or my neighbors for loud pipes.
Most times I don't wear a helmet when riding, simply to enjoy a sunny day. As any interstate commuter can tell you, serious highway noise does not come from motorcycles. It comes from the wind displacement, air brakes and diesel engines of over-the-road trucks. In heavy traffic, I don't hear another Harley until it pulls along side.
So I return to the loss of this man's old flame. Admittedly, we Harley riders are burly and roguishly handsome specimens of the American male. Who can fault this unknown women?
But to criticize the motorcycle seems like a cheap shot.
- Chico Buller, Sun Prairie
Noise group should focus on true terrorism
Noise terrorism group to fight noise pollution?
What next?
Will children be told to be quiet at city parks and backyards? Will ball games and concerts have to be conducted quietly? Will the Fourth of July have to go extinct?
Maybe all the energy this group has should be used to help prevent child and spousal abuse and neglect that frightens and intimidates the victims.
Those really are acts of terrorism.
- Sharon Johnson, Madison

Load-Date: December 29, 2009


End of Document