White House launches CIA probe
Telegraph Herald (Dubuque, IA)
August 25, 2009 Tuesday


Copyright 2009 Woodward Communications, Inc. All Rights Reserved
Section: A; Pg. 5
Length: 470 words
Byline: DEVLIN BARRETT and PAMELA HESS The Associated Press
Body


WASHINGTON - The Obama administration launched a criminal investigation Monday into harsh questioning of detainees during President George W. Bush's war on terrorism, revealing CIA interrogators' threats to kill one suspect's children and to force another to watch his mother sexually assaulted. At the same time, President Barack Obama ordered changes in future interrogations, bringing in other agencies besides the CIA under the direction of the FBI and supervised by his own national security adviser. The administration pledged questioning would be controlled by the Army Field Manual, with strict rules on tactics, and said the White House would keep its hands off the professional investigators doing the work. 
Despite the announcement of the criminal probe, several Obama spokesmen declared anew - as the president has repeatedly - that on the subject of detainee interrogation he "wants to look forward, not back" at Bush tactics. They took pains to say decisions on any prosecutions would be up to Attorney General Eric Holder, not the White House. Monday's five-year-old report by the CIA's inspector general, newly declassified and released under a federal court's orders, described severe tactics used by interrogators on terror suspects after the Sept. 11, 2001, attacks. Seeking information about possible further attacks, interrogators threatened one detainee with a gun and a power drill and tried to frighten another with a mock execution of another prisoner. Attorney General Holder said he had chosen a veteran prosecutor, John Durham, to determine whether any CIA officers or contractors should face criminal charges for crossing the line on rough but permissible tactics. Obama has said interrogators would not face charges if they followed legal guidelines, but the report by the CIA's inspector general said they went too far - even beyond what was authorized under Justice Department legal memos that have since been discredited. The report also suggested some questioners knew they were crossing a line. "Ten years from now we're going to be sorry we're doing this (but) it has to be done," one unidentified CIA officer was quoted as saying, predicting the questioners would someday have to appear in court to answer for such tactics. The report concluded the CIA used "unauthorized, improvised, inhumane" practices in questioning "high-value" terror suspects. Monday's documents represent the largest single release of information about the Bush administration's once-secret system of capturing terrorism suspects and interrogating them in overseas prisons. White House officials said they plan to continue the controversial practice of rendition of suspects to foreign countries, though they said that in future cases they would more carefully check to make sure such suspects are not tortured.

Load-Date: August 25, 2009


End of Document