White House voices war on terrorism
USA TODAY
August 24, 1998, Monday,
FINAL EDITION


Copyright 1998 Gannett Company, Inc.
Section: NEWS;
Length: 390 words
Byline: Steve Marshall; Jack Kelley
Body


The Clinton administration's top leaders took to the airwaves
Sunday to sell the new war on terrorism, launched with Thursday's
missile strikes on Afghanistan and Sudan.
Speaking on ABC-TV's This Week, Secretary of State Madeleine
Albright said the attacks weren't just aimed at Saudi-born fanatic
Osama bin Laden. "We do not think that just focusing on one single
individual this way proves anything," she said on ABC's This
Week with Sam Donaldson and Cokie Roberts.
Still, said Defense Secretary William Cohen on NBC's Meet the
Press, if bin Laden died in a future U.S. action, no one would
weep over "someone who is that fanatical about killing innocent
human beings."
Also Sunday, Sudan said it wants a White House apology for the
missile strike against a factory in Khartoum.
Britain, Germany and other European states backed the bombing
of a pharmaceutical factory in Khartoum that U.S. officials said
produced chemical warfare agents.
President Clinton ordered the attack, and a strike against camps
associated with bin Laden in Afghanistan, in retaliation for bombings
of U.S. embassies in Kenya and Tanzania.
The Sudan factory was reportedly destroyed. In Afghanistan, at
least 21 died, more than 50 were injured and damage was "moderate
to heavy."
A USA TODAY/CNN/Gallup Poll of more than 400 adults taken Friday-Saturday
found 76% approve of further attacks using missiles and 65% of
those polled approve of using ground troops. The margin of error
is +/- 5 percentage points. Also:
-- The president announced new steps to hit bin Laden's organizations
by seizing U.S. assets owned by him, his top assistants or their
organization.
-- Clinton gained support from Republicans, who last week questioned
the attacks as a way to deflect interest from the Monica Lewinsky
affair.
"I think the president did exactly the right thing," Rep. Porter
Goss, R-Fla., chairman of the House Intelligence Committee, told
Fox News Sunday.
-- The operation, code-named Infinite Reach, was born 10 days
before the strikes, Newsweek says today, and was so secret
that even people in Cohen's office didn't know.
-- In Nairobi, FBI agents investigating the bombing of the U.S.
Embassy said they believe eight people were involved. Three of
the men being held said they were sent to Kenya last year by bin
Laden and sponsored by a Nairobi-based Islamic aid group which
works with a Saudi financier.

Load-Date: August 24, 1998


End of Document