White House slams ex-aide over 9/11 claims
USA TODAY
March 23, 2004, Tuesday,
FINAL EDITION


Copyright 2004 Gannett Company, Inc.
Section: NEWS;
Length: 1053 words
Byline: Judy Keen
Dateline: WASHINGTON
Body

WASHINGTON -- White House officials fought back Monday against charges by the former top anti-terrorism official that President Bush ignored warnings about al-Qaeda and pressured him to link Iraq with Sept. 11.
Richard Clarke "just does not know what he is talking about," national security adviser Condoleezza Rice told ABC's Good Morning America. "He wasn't involved in most" meetings where such issues were discussed, she said.
White House press secretary Scott McClellan called Clarke's assertions "deeply irresponsible" and "flat-out wrong."
The aggressive effort by the White House to refute Clarke indicates concern about the damage his charges could do to Bush, whose management of the war on terrorism is a key part of the case he makes for his re-election.
In a new book, Against All Enemies, and in interviews, Clarke has said administration officials didn't heed his warnings that al-Qaeda was planning an attack. They were fixated on Iraq's Saddam Hussein, he said, and rejected his urgent request for a Cabinet meeting in early 2001 to discuss al-Qaeda.
A high-ranking administration official said that Clarke was wrong and that Bush was focused on al-Qaeda and terrorism soon after taking office. The official said Clarke was asked March 7, 2001, to prepare a strategy to eliminate al-Qaeda. The same person said Bush wrote to Pakistani President Pervez Musharraf in the second week of February 2001 to express concerns about al-Qaeda.
Clarke had lunch with Rice after he left the administration, a month or two before the attack on Iraq, and gave none of the warnings he recounts in the book, said Sean McCormack, National Security Council spokesman.
McClellan said the timing of Clarke's book suggests he's motivated by "politics and book promotions." On Rush Limbaugh's radio program, Vice President Cheney said Clarke "wasn't in the loop" and "may have had a grudge to bear" because he left the White House after being passed over for a promotion. Clarke sought a job as deputy secretary of the Department of Homeland Security.
Cheney also noted that Clarke worked in the Clinton White House when al-Qaeda first attacked the World Trade Center in 1993, when U.S. embassies in Africa were bombed in 1998 and when the USS Cole was attacked in 2000. "What were they doing in those days when he was in charge of counterterrorism?" Cheney asked.
Clarke told CBS' 60 Minutes on Sunday that he believes White House staffers owe the president their loyalty "up to a point."
"When the president starts doing things that risk American lives, then loyalty to him has to be put aside," he said.
On Monday, Clarke told ABC that American troops who fought in Iraq "died for the president's own agenda, which had nothing to do with the war on terrorism."
Rice wrote an opinion article in Monday's Washington Post defending Bush's record on terrorism. She and White House communications director Dan Bartlett did several TV interviews Monday, and McClellan was unusually harsh in his two daily news briefings. He called the controversy "Dick Clarke's American Grandstand."
Clarke's book promotion coincides with testimony he'll give Wednesday to a commission investigating whether Sept. 11 could have been prevented.
The Clarke dispute could weaken Bush's credibility in the war on terrorism. A USA TODAY/CNN/Gallup Poll taken March 5-7 showed that 60% of Americans believe Bush would do a better job handling terrorism than Massachusetts Sen. John Kerry, the Democratic presidential candidate.
Bush, who prizes loyalty and discipline, has been criticized by former officials before. Former Treasury secretary Paul O'Neill said in a book that within days of his inauguration, Bush began making plans to invade Iraq. John Diulio, director of Bush's office of "faith-based" programs, called the White House "Mayberry Machiavellis." But neither had Clarke's inside view of decision-making on terrorism.
Clarke had advised presidents Clinton, George H.W. Bush and Reagan. Clinton made him "terrorism czar" and gave him a rank equal to Cabinet secretaries. When Bush took office, he demoted Clarke. Clarke became the White House expert on cyberterrorism before resigning in February 2003.
Clarke's book, released Monday, was No. 5 on Amazon.com's top 100 best sellers list.
Clarke is chairman of Good Harbor Consulting of Arlington, Va. He lectures at Harvard University's John F. Kennedy School of Government and teaches a class there with Rand Beers, Kerry's national security adviser.
Two points of view on the fight against terrorism
Richard Clarke, former chief of counterterrorism for President Bush, says in his book, Against All Enemies, that Bush took office intending to oust Iraqi President Saddam Hussein and ignored Clarke's warnings that focusing on the al-Qaeda terrorist network was more urgent.
Issue
What Clarke says
What the White House says
---
Al-Qaeda
"Within a week of the Inauguration I wrote to (national security adviser Condoleezza) Rice . . . asking 'urgently' for . . . a meeting to review the imminent al Qaeda threat." Against All Enemies"
He wanted another meeting. I didn't think another meeting was necessary. The principals (in the administration) knew what the threat was. What we needed was a strategy." Rice on CNN
---
Linking 9/11and Iraq
Bush "grabbed a few of us and closed the door to the conference room. 'Look,' he told us . . . 'See if Saddam was involved. Just look. I want to know any shred.' " Against All Enemies
Bush "doesn't recall that conversation or meeting." White House press secretary Scott McClellan
---
Briefing the president
"I had not been allowed to brief the president on terrorism in January (2001) or since, not until today, Sept. 11." Against All Enemies"
He wasn't in the loop, frankly, on a lot of this stuff. . . . He clearly missed a lot of what was going on." Vice President Cheney on Rush Limbaugh's radio program
---
Clarke's post-9/11 report finding no link to Iraq
"We sent it up to the president and it got bounced by the national security adviser or deputy. It got bounced and sent back saying 'Wrong answer.' " Clarke, CBS' 60 Minutes"
Not 'wrong answer.' I asked him to go back and check it again a week or two later to make sure there was no emerging new evidence that Iraq was involved." Deputy national security adviser Stephen Hadley, 60 Minutes
---
Reported by Judy Keen, USA TODAY

Graphic

 
PHOTO, B/W, 2001 photo by Lee Celano, AFP/Getty Images; PHOTO, B/W, Mario Tama, Getty Images; PHOTO, B/W, Alex Wong, Getty Images; PHOTO, Color, Charles Dharapak, AP (page 1A); Clarke: Says Bush officials ignored his warnings about al-Qaeda. <>Top-seller: Coincides with Clarke's testimony before a 9/11 panel. <>ice: Says Clarke does not know what he is talking about."

Load-Date: March 23, 2004


End of Document