White House considers drone strike on U.S. terrorism suspect Situation is complicated by new rules governing use of attacks.
St. Louis Post-Dispatch (Missouri)
February 11, 2014 Tuesday
THIRD EDITION


Copyright 2014 St. Louis Post-Dispatch, Inc. All Rights Reserved
Section: NEWS; Pg. A13
Length: 626 words
Byline:  By KIMBERLY DOZIER Associated Press   
Body


WASHINGTON • The case of an American citizen and suspected member of al-Qaida who is allegedly planning attacks on U.S. targets overseas underscores the complexities of President Barack Obama's new, stricter targeting guidelines for the use of deadly drones.
The CIA drones watching him cannot strike because he's a U.S. citizen. The Pentagon drones that could are barred from the country where he's hiding, and the Justice Department has not yet finished building a case against him.
Four U.S. officials said the American terrorism suspect was in a country that refused U.S. military action on its soil and that had proved unable to go after him. And Obama's new policy says American terrorism suspects overseas can be killed by only the military, not the CIA, producing a policy conundrum for the White House.
Two of the officials described the man as an al-Qaida facilitator who has been directly responsible for deadly attacks against U.S. citizens overseas and who continues to plan attacks against them that would use improvised explosive devices.
The officials said the suspected terrorist was well-guarded and in a fairly remote location, so any unilateral attempt by U.S. troops to capture him would be risky and even more politically explosive than a U.S. missile strike.
White House press secretary Jay Carney said Monday that he would not comment on specific operations and pointed to Obama's comments in the major counterterrorism speech last May about drone policy.
"When a U.S. citizen goes abroad to wage war against America and is actively plotting to kill U.S. citizens, and when neither the United States, nor our partners are in a position to capture him before he carries out a plot, his citizenship should no more serve as a shield than a sniper shooting down on an innocent crowd should be protected from a SWAT team," Carney said, quoting from Obama's speech last year.
Under new guidelines Obama addressed in the speech made to calm anger overseas at the extent of the U.S. drone campaign, lethal force must be used only "to prevent or stop attacks against U.S. persons, and even then, only when capture is not feasible and no other reasonable alternatives exist to address the threat effectively." The target must also pose "a continuing, imminent threat to U.S. persons" - the legal definition of catching someone in the act of plotting a lethal attack.
The AP has agreed to the government's request to withhold the name of the country where the suspected terrorist is believed to be because officials said publishing it could interrupt ongoing counterterrorism operations.
The officials spoke on condition of anonymity because they were not authorized to discuss the classified drone targeting program publicly.
House Intelligence Committee Chairman Mike Rogers, R-Mich., complained last week that a number of terrorist suspects were all but out of reach under the administration's new rules that limit drone strikes based on the target's nationality or location. Two of the U.S. officials said the Justice Department review of the American terrorism suspect started last fall.
The senior administration official confirmed that the Justice Department was working to build a case against the suspected terrorist. The official said, however, the legal procedure being followed is the same as when the U.S. killed militant cleric and former Virginia resident Anwar al-Awlaki by drone in Yemen in 2011, long before the new targeted killing policy took effect.
The official said the president could make an exception to his policy and authorize the CIA to strike on a one-time basis or authorize the Pentagon to act despite the potential objections of the country in question.
The Justice Department, the Pentagon and the CIA declined to comment.

Graphic

 
 FILE - In this Jan. 31, 2010 file photo an unmanned U.S. Predator drone flies over Kandahar Air Field, southern Afghanistan, on a moon-lit night. An American citizen who is a member of al-Qaida is actively planning attacks against Americans overseas, U.S. officials say, and the Obama administration is wrestling with whether to kill him with a drone strike and how to do so legally under its new stricter targeting policy issued last year. The CIA drones watching him cannot strike because he's a U.S. citizen and the Justice Department must build a case against him, a task it hasn't completed. And President Barack Obama's new policy says American suspected terrorists overseas can only be killed by the military, not the CIA, creating a policy conundrum for the White House. (AP Photo/Kirsty Wigglesworth, File)  FILE - This June 18, 2013 file photo shows House Intelligence Committee Chairman Rep. Mike Rogers, R-Mich., listening to testimony on Capitol Hill in Washington. An American citizen who is a member of Al Qaida is actively planning attacks against Americans overseas, U.S. officials say, and the Obama administration is wrestling with whether to kill him with a drone strike and how to do so legally under its new stricter targeting policy issued last year. The CIA drones watching him cannot strike because he's an American citizen and the Justice Department must build a case against him, a task it has not completed. (AP Photo/Charles Dharapak, File)  FILE - In this Sept. 5, 2013 file photo, Senate Intelligence Committee Chair Sen. Dianne Feinstein, D-Calif., speaks to reporters on Capitol Hill in Washington. An American citizen who is a member of Al Qaida is actively planning attacks against Americans overseas, U.S. officials say, and the Obama administration is wrestling with whether to kill him with a drone strike and how to do so legally under its new stricter targeting policy issued last year. The CIA drones watching him cannot strike because he's an American citizen and the Justice Department must build a case against him, a task it has not completed. (AP Photo/Manuel Balce Ceneta, File) 

Load-Date: February 12, 2014


End of Document