WHITE HOUSE SAYS IT CAN HANDLE SADDAM WHILE FIGHTING TERRORISM;
 SOME IN CONGRESS HAVE CONCERNS ABOUT TIMETABLE
St. Louis Post-Dispatch (Missouri)
September 16, 2002 Monday Five Star Lift Edition


Copyright 2002 St. Louis Post-Dispatch, Inc.
Section: NEWS ; Pg. A9
Length: 512 words
Byline: The Associated Press
Dateline: WASHINGTON
Body


The Bush administration insisted Sunday that the U.S. military can simultaneously fight terrorism and confront Iraq, as White House officials said Congress and the United Nations must act quickly to show resolve against Saddam Hussein.
But members of Congress were split on whether it was wise to act within four weeks on an undefined resolution about Iraq, as Secretary of State Colin Powell called for. There were signs of a possible stalemate before the midterm congressional elections in November.
"We don't know what this administration wants to do," Senate Majority Leader Tom Daschle said on ABC's "This Week." He said President George W. Bush had yet to ask for a resolution on Iraq. But Bush's national security adviser, Condoleezza Rice, said: "Obviously, it is up to the Congress to offer resolutions, not to the administration."
Several leading lawmakers made clear they will consider such resolutions on their own timetable.
Daschle was noncommittal on whether Congress could pass such a resoluti on before Election Day, saying only that it was possible. Sen. John McCain, R-Ariz., said it would help Bush if Congress acted before its planned recess in mid-October.
Sen. John Kerry, D-Mass., said he agreed with that timetable, but added that the resolution should not necessarily authorize force against Iraq.
He said on CBS's "Face the Nation" that he preferred "something that could get a 100-to-nothing vote, something that says to the United Nations, look, we are really serious about this and we're all behind the effort to try to seek a consensus on dealing with Saddam Hussein."
On the diplomatic front, Powell said he hoped that intensive work on drafting a resolution for the Security Council could begin by the end of this week. He was optimistic about a vote by the Security Council within a few weeks.
The measure should give the Iraqi president "a matter of weeks" to comply with long-standing U.N. resolutions on his weapons program, Powell said.
Powell met with council members last week to win support for a tough resolution and planned to return to New York today to resume the effort.
Some lawmakers, including Daschle, D-S.D., have questioned whether war with Iraq would undermine the hunt for al-Qaida terrorists behind the attacks on Sept. 11 last year.
"We fully believe that the United States is capable of conducting the war on terrorism and dealing with other threats," Rice said on ABC.
But Sen. Bob Graham, D-Fla., said on "Fox News Sunday" that Saddam is "not one of the primary threats to the United States."
Pointing to the arrests of five men who allegedly belonged to a terrorist cell near Buffalo, N.Y., Graham said, "What worries me is that I think the war on terrorism has bogged down."
"Why were those five people arrested in Buffalo? Primarily because we had evidence that they had been at an al-Qaida training camp in 2001," Graham said. "Those camps, in my judgment, are the real threat to the United States security, and that's what I think our priority ought to be, in terms of protecting the people of America, is taking them out."

Graphic

 
PHOTO; THE ASSOCIATED PRESS Color Photo - Secretary of State Colin Powell said work on a U.N. resolution on Iraq could begin this week.

Load-Date: September 16, 2002


End of Document