White Nationalistic Terrorism vs the U.S.
The Orion: California State University - Chico
March 10, 2019 Sunday


University Wire
Copyright 2019 UWIRE via U-Wire All Rights Reserved
Section: OPINION; Pg. 1
Length: 588 words
Byline: Gage Northcutt
Body


A lieutenant for the United States Coast Guard was arrested and charged on Feb. 15, for drug possession and possessing a gun while unlawfully using a controlled substance.
DISCLAIMER: For personal reasons, I will be omitting the name of the person involved.
I do this becauseI donot want to give this person a platform. While I cannot do anything about the legal records, I can omit the name from my own writing and hope that it is enough.
I want this person to be a lesson, not a legend.
With that clear, let us talk about what happened:
According to an affidavit supporting the criminal complaint and arrest warrant, the defendant had large amount of guns and a drug called Tramadol, an analgesic painkiller medication that acts similar to narcotics.
With surveillance, the FBI was able to capture enough substantial proof of these violations that it was enough for an arrest warrant.
After being arrested, investigators searched the house and computer files of the defendant and according to a court motion, they found much more.
In the defendant's residence were 15 firearms and over 1,000 rounds of mixed ammunition, along with a terrorist plot that prosecutors said was, "on a scale rarely seen in this country."
The defendant composed a draft email dated June 2, 2017, with very concerning wording. The email contained the following:
"I am dreaming of a way to kill almost every last person on the earth. I think a plague would be most successful but how do I acquire the needed/ Spanish flu, botulism, anthrax not sure yet but will find something."
"Liberalist/globalist ideology is destroying traditional peoples esp white... Much blood will have to be spilled to get whitey off the couch... Looking to Russia with hopeful eyes or any land that despises the west's liberalism. Excluding of course the Muslim scum."
"Have to take serious look at appropriate individual targets, to bring greatest impact. Professors, DR's, Politian's, Judges, leftists in general."
The defendant even wrote about their drug habits as mentioned above, in reference to getting "clearer" to help with plotting mass murder.
"Need to come off TDL [Tramadol], clear my head. Read and get education have to move to friendly area and start to organize... start now. Be ready."
The defendant also wrote a letter on behalf of being a white supremacist (in case the other writings didn't give it away) and plans on using "focused violence" to revitalize Western-white culture.
A presumed hit list was also found which named multiple liberal journalists, commentators and politicians that are labeled "traitors." The names were crudely written but are assumed to include Chris Hayes from MSNBC, Democratic House Speaker Nancy Pelosi, Don Lemon from CNN, Democratic New York U.S. Representative Alexandria Ocasio-Cortez and many more.
My Thoughts:
As a person who hopes to serve in the U.S. Coast Guard, this thoroughly disgusts me.
The flagrant disregard for human life and indecency is nearly insurmountable and I hope that this terror-seeking nutcase is brought swift and unwavering justice.
I thank the Coast Guard and FBI for their diligence in this case and for removing a monster such as this from the public.
This person was only caught under watchful eyes, I can not stress enough importance of reporting red flags. Do not keep your head down, and always speak up, because lives could be on the line.
It takes more than just the FBI and the Coast Guard, it takes all of us. We the people.
Gage Northcutt can be reached at [email protected] and @GageNorthcutt on Twitter.

Load-Date: March 10, 2019


End of Document