White House Postpones Picking Site of 9/11 Trial
The New York Times
March 6, 2010 Saturday
Late Edition - Final


Copyright 2010 The New York Times Company
Section: Section A; Column 0; National Desk; Pg. 13
Length: 1053 words
Byline: By CHARLIE SAVAGE; Jeff Zeleny contributed reporting.
Body


WASHINGTON -- The Obama administration said Friday  that a decision on where to prosecute Khalid Shaikh Mohammed and four accused of conspiring in the Sept. 11 attacks would not be made ''for weeks,'' following a flare-up in the debate about whether that trial should take place in civilian court or before a military commission.
  The White House sought to dampen speculation that a decision on where to hold a trial might be imminent. That speculation was fanned by a report Friday that aides to President Obama might recommend that he pull the prosecution out of civilian court and send it back to a military commission, where the Bush administration had planned to hold it.
  ''No decision has been made,'' Robert Gibbs, the White House press secretary, said Friday. 
  Still, in a conference call with reporters, three retired military officers said Friday that holding a Sept. 11 trial in a military commission would be a mistake. All three supported Mr. Obama last year when he signed an order calling for the closing of the prison at Guantanamo Bay, Cuba.
  ''I would be deeply saddened if this thing would be reversed,'' said one officer, Maj. Gen. William L. Nash of the Army. ''It would give aid to our enemies. It would lessen our relationship with allies who have been extremely happy with the reversal of course we have taken. This is not the time to be scared.''
  In addition, September 11th Families for Peaceful Tomorrows, a group of more than 200 relatives of victims of the attacks, issued a statement saying it was ''deeply troubled'' by reports that Mr. Mohammed, accused of being the mastermind of the attacks, and four accused of conspiring with him, might not receive a civilian trial after all.
  ''Civilian trials in federal courts have resulted in hundreds of successful terrorism prosecutions,'' said Donna O'Connor, a spokeswoman for the group, ''whereas military commissions are an illegitimate system that undermines the rule of law.''
  The group and others spoke out after The Washington Post, citing anonymous officials, reported in a front-page article Friday that advisers to the president were close to recommending that Mr. Obama prosecute the Sept. 11 case in a military tribunal.
  Officials at the White House, Justice Department and Pentagon said Friday that Mr. Obama had not made any decision and that no recommendation had been sent to him. They said the state of play over the administration's deliberations about the trial was unchanged from where it had stood for weeks.
  Nevertheless, the administration showed signs of sensitivity to criticism over the Post article. Earlier Friday, Mr. Gibbs canceled his daily briefing. One aide said he was not feeling well, while another said he had meetings on other issues. A third aide said that until a decision was reached, the administration would have nothing else to say about the matter.
  Elisa Massimino, the president of Human Rights First, which organized the conference call with the retired officers, cautioned that Friday's Post article might have been put out by members of the administration who preferred  military commissions, as a ''trial balloon'' or to create perceived momentum for that policy.
  It has been apparent that elements within the administration have been reconsidering the military commission option since late January, after New York officials, citing the cost and disruption of security, dropped their support for Attorney General Eric H. Holder Jr.'s decision to hold a civilian trial in Manhattan. 
  Other elected officials from the three possible civilian trial venues -- southern New York, eastern Virginia, and western Pennsylvania, the sites of the Sept. 11 attacks -- quickly said they, too, opposed hosting such a trial. And some members of Congress have proposed legislation forbidding the use of funds for civilian trials.
  Against that backdrop, the White House convened a series of meetings about what to do. And in an early sign of shifting momentum, Mr. Holder said in an interview with The New York Times on Feb. 9 that while a civilian trial made the most sense, one had to be ''flexible'' and that justice could be achieved in a military commission, too. 
  Meanwhile, the White House chief of staff, Rahm Emanuel, who opposed Mr. Holder's decision, has been negotiating a potential deal with Senator Lindsey Graham, Republican of South Carolina.
  Mr. Graham is offering to provide some Republican support for closing the Guantanamo prison, but wants the Sept. 11 trial put back in a military commission. He is also seeking White House support for legislation that would set rules for the handling of detainees -- including authorizing the holding of terrorism suspects without trial in the future.
  But other Republicans are taking an increasingly hard line about how terrorism suspects should be treated.
  On Thursday, Senators John McCain, Republican of Arizona, and Joe Lieberman, independent of Connecticut, unveiled legislation that would require the government to put all ''enemy belligerents'' -- including terrorism suspects arrested in the United States, without an exception for United States citizens -- in military custody for interrogation. 
  Their bill would also prohibit officials from informing such detainees of their Miranda rights and from prosecuting noncitizen terror suspects in civilian courts. 
  Mr. Graham, by contrast, has told the White House that civilian trials could be appropriate for those without strong ties to Al Qaeda and for lower-level operatives. That view, along with his support for closing the Guantanamo prison, makes Mr. Graham the exception among his fellow Republicans. 
  On Friday, for example, the Senate Republican Leader, Mitch McConnell of Kentucky, declared, ''When a foreign national terrorist is captured -- in the United States like the Christmas bomber, or overseas -- he should be sent to Guantanamo, detained there, interrogated there, and the case adjudicated there.''
  Other conservatives and Republicans also vowed to keep pushing the administration to back down from its effort to close the Guantanamo prison.
  ''I hope that next,'' said Representative Lamar Smith, Republican of Texas, ''they will realize that Guantanamo Bay is best equipped for the detention and prosecution of terrorists, not a prison inside the U.S.''

http://www.nytimes.com

Graphic

 
PHOTOS: Attorney General Eric H. Holder Jr. originally wanted a civilian trial in Manhattan for Sept. 11 suspects. Republicans want military commissions at the prison on Guantanamo Bay, Cuba. (PHOTOGRAPHS BY ADRIANO MACHADO/REUTERS
 TODD HEISLER/THE NEW YORK TIMES)                                 

Load-Date: March 6, 2010


End of Document