Whitmer: Michigan prepared to keep voters safe; Governor says threats remain after alleged plot
USA TODAY
October 12, 2020 Monday
FIRST EDITION


Copyright 2020 Gannett Company, Inc. All Rights Reserved
Section: NEWS; Pg. 3A
Length: 450 words
Byline: Paul Egan, Detroit Free Press, USA TODAY NETWORK
Body


LANSING, Mich. - Gov. Gretchen Whitmer, the target of an alleged kidnapping plot that included threats of violence, said Sunday she is not worried about violence on Nov. 3, but the state is prepared to keep voters safe that day.
Whitmer also said on CBS News' "Face the Nation" that she believes "there still are serious threats" from individuals  aligned with groups similar to those involved in  an alleged plot against her, a suspected act of domestic terrorism.
Asked  if she is worried about violence on Election Day,  Whitmer said: "I'm not worried, but we are preparing to make sure that we do everything to keep people safe."
"We will not tolerate anyone ... interfering with someone's ability to safely vote."
On Thursday, the federal government charged six men with conspiracy to kidnap in connection with a suspected plot to kidnap Whitmer that authorities said they wanted to carry out before Election Day. Also Thursday, Michigan Attorney General Dana Nessel brought charges against seven other men that included supporting terrorism, gang membership and possession of a firearm in commission of a felony.
The range of suspected plans included kidnapping Whitmer from her family's summer cottage and taking her to Wisconsin for a "trial" on treason charges, an armed attack on the Michigan Capitol in Lansing, and attacks on law enforcement. Officials said some of those accused had purchased a high-voltage Taser and night goggles, conducted surveillance on Whitmer and had arranged to purchase explosives.
Whitmer repeated earlier comments that she believes groups such as the Wolverine Watchmen, whose founders are accused in her case, are taking comfort and motivation from statements by President Donald Trump and some Republican leaders in the Michigan Legislature who have spoken at rallies against her emergency orders to contain the spread of COVID-19.
Trump, who tweeted "Liberate Michigan" in capital letters after an anti-Whitmer demonstration  in April, "has been increasingly divisive and downright dangerous," Whitmer said.
On Saturday, state House Speaker Lee Chatfield, in a series of tweets and in an "open letter" to Whitmer released by his office, criticized the governor for not tipping off legislative leaders and security officials about the suspected plot, which she has said officials advised her about a few weeks ago.
"Why weren't we in the Legislature warned of the plot to take hostages at the Capitol?" Chatfield asked in the letter.
"The plot by these terrorists was against us, too. Why weren't House sergeants warned? You knew, and we weren't even given a warning. We had people working in the building every day doing essential work, and their lives matter, too." 

Load-Date: October 12, 2020


End of Document