White House says species act will not be changed
St. Petersburg Times (Florida)
May 15, 1990, Tuesday, City Edition


Times Publishing Company
Section: NATIONAL; WASHINGTON DIGEST; Pg. 4A; DIGEST
Length: 452 words
Dateline: ARLINGTON, Va.
Body


The White House, rejecting complaints by Interior Secretary Manuel Lujan, said Monday that President Bush does not want to weaken the nation's primary law protecting endangered animals and plants. "We have no plans to change the act at this time," White House press secretary Marlin Fitzwater said. Lujan expressed concern last week that the 17-year-old Endangered Species Act was threatening jobs and economic development. "It's just too tough an act, I think," he said.
Report said to mandate retaliation for attacks
 A presidential commission on aviation terrorism will recommend consideration of military strikes on terrorist enclaves as "pre-emptory or retaliatory" action against terrorist attacks, according to NBC News. If military action is impossible, the Aviation Security and Terrorism Commission recommends "covert action" instead, the network reported. The network also said the commission will recommend deferral of the Federal Aviation Administration's program to install new explosives detectors at the world's major airports on the grounds the machines don't work yet.  Commission members were unavailable for comment; their findings are to be presented to President Bush today.
 Decrease reported in some
 cocaine-related problems
 ARLINGTON, Va.  Cocaine-related medical emergencies in the United States dropped 20 percent drop in the fourth quarter of 1989, Secretary of Health and Human Services Louis Sullivan reported Monday. "We are making significant headway in our efforts to establish a drug-free America," Sullivan told state and local officials at a conference called by the Office of National Drug Control Policy. Sullivan's announcement came in the wake of a congressional report that said the number of hard-core cocaine addicts in the country was 2.2-million more than twice what had been estimated earlier. Sullivan said the decrease in emergencies was noted in almost all major metropolitan areas.
 Hope's son recommended
 for Indian commission job
 A Senate committee has recommended that Anthony Hope be confirmed by the full Senate as chairman of the Indian Gaming Commission. Hope, a lawyer and son of entertainer Bob Hope, testified last week before the Senate Select Committee on Indian Affairs. He would be the first chairman of the new commission, established to oversee gambling on Indian reservations. The three-year post pays $ 83,600 annually.
 Briefly. . .
 President Bush will nominate Robert E. Lamb, the assistant secretary of state for diplomatic security, as ambassador to Cyprus, the White House said Monday.
 Washington Mayor Marion Barry, already facing a total of eight cocaine possession and perjury charges, is to be arraigned today on six more drug-related charges.
 

Load-Date: November 13, 1992


End of Document