White House defends waterboarding President could OK use of the interrogation technique, official says.
St. Louis Post-Dispatch (Missouri)
February 7, 2008 Thursday
THIRD EDITION


Copyright 2008 St. Louis Post-Dispatch, Inc. All Rights Reserved
Section: NEWS; Pg. A4
Length: 450 words
Byline: By Jennifer Loven THE ASSOCIATED PRESS
Dateline: WASHINGTON 
Body


The White House on Wednesday defended the use of the interrogation technique known as waterboarding, saying it is legal - not torture as critics argue - and has saved American lives.
President George W. Bush could authorize waterboarding for future terrorism suspects if certain criteria are met, a spokesman said.
On Tuesday, the Bush administration acknowledged publicly for the first time that the tactic was used by U.S. government questioners on three terrorism suspects. Testifying before Congress, CIA Director Michael Hayden said Khalid Sheikh Mohammed, Abu Zubayda and Abd al-Rahim al-Nashiri were waterboarded in 2002 and 2003.
Waterboarding involves strapping a suspect down and pouring water over his cloth-covered face to create the sensation of drowning. It has been traced back hundreds of years, to the Spanish Inquisition, and is condemned by nations around the world.
Hayden banned the technique in 2006 for CIA interrogations, the Pentagon has banned it, and FBI Director Robert Mueller said his investigators do not use coercive tactics in interviewing suspects.
Senate Democrats demanded a criminal investigation after Hayden's revelation. Bush personally authorized Hayden's testimony, White House deputy spokesman Tony Fratto said. Fratto said CIA interrogators could use waterboarding again, but would need the president's approval to do so. That approval would "depend on the circumstances," with one important factor being "belief that an attack might be imminent," Fratto said.
CIA TAPES
Meanwhile, newly unsealed documents show that the lead prosecutor in the terrorism case against Zacarias Moussaoui might have known the CIA destroyed tapes of its interrogations of al-Qaida suspects more than a year before the government admitted it to the court.
One of the tapes recorded the interrogation of Zubayda. The documents, which were declassified and released Wednesday by the 4th U.S. Circuit Court of Appeals, detail efforts by Moussaoui's attorneys to send the case back to a lower federal court to find out why the tapes weren't disclosed and whether they would have influenced his decision to plead guilty.
In a Dec. 18, 2007, letter to the appeals court's chief judge, the Justice Department acknowledged that its lead prosecutor in the case, Robert A. Spencer, may have been told of the tapes' destruction in late February or early March of 2006, just as the U.S. District Court in Alexandria, Va., was beginning its trial on whether Moussaoui would be eligible for the death penalty. Spencer "does not recall being told this information," U.S. Attorney Chuck Rosenberg wrote in the letter.
---
Talk
STLtoday.com/current Is waterboarding torture? Talk about it in Current Affairs.

Load-Date: February 7, 2008


End of Document