WHITE HOUSE REJECTS CARTER'S CALL TO PROVE PLANT'S TERRORIST LINKS
St. Louis Post-Dispatch (Missouri)
September 19, 1998, Saturday, FIVE STAR LIFT EDITION


Copyright 1998 St. Louis Post-Dispatch, Inc.
Section: NEWS, Pg. 2
Length: 466 words
Byline: The Associated Press
Dateline: WASHINGTON
Body


* National security adviser insists the United States had "overwhelming grounds" to attack a chemical factory in Sudan that produced medicine.
The White House on Friday defended its decision to attack a suspected chemical weapons factory in Sudan last month. Sandy Berger, President Bill Clinton's national security adviser, rejected a call by former President Jimmy Carter to investigate whether the plant really had a terrorism connection.
"We had overwhelming grounds to strike this facility," Berger said when asked about Carter's statements. "For us to have not struck that plant, I think, would have been irresponsible."
Carter said a technical team should take samples of soil and building materials at the factory site.
"If the evidence shows that the Sudanese are guilty, they should be condemned for lying and for contributing to terrorist activities," Carter said Thursday. "Otherwise, we should admit our error and make amends to those who have suffered loss or injury."
Also, in spite of U.S. objections, Arab states began drafting a resolution Friday at the United Nations, demanding that the Security Council authorize a fact-finding mission to investigate U.S. claims that the Sudanese factory was making chemical weapons.
Arab ambassadors met at the United Nations to work out the details of the resolution, which Bahrain - the lone Arab nation on the council - was to begin circulating among council members next week, said the Sudanese ambassador, Elfatih Erwa.
Berger's spokesman, David Leavy, said Clinton's administration opposes an investigation such as Carter recommended.
Berger said Clinton would renew his plea for international cooperation in fighting terrorism when he addresses the opening of the U.N. General Assembly on Monday.
In justifying the Aug. 20 missile strike at the factory in Sudan's capital, Clinton has said it was linked to an international terrorist ring led by Osama bin Laden.
Berger said, "The dividing line is between those who in practice support and tolerate terror and those who understand that terrorism is plain and simple murder."
Berger said that while the Sudanese plant did make legitimate medical products such as penicillin, there was no reason to doubt that it also produced EMPTA, a compound that Berger said has no use other than in chemical weapons, particularly VX nerve agents.
In previewing Clinton's terrorism speech at U.N. headquarters, Berger said the president also would meet separately with Italian Prime Minister Romano Prodi on Sunday evening and Pakistani Prime Minister Nawaz Sharif on Monday.
Berger said a decision would be made within a few weeks on whether Clinton will visit Pakistan and India, as was planned before the two nations tested nuclear devices in May in defiance of U.S. urgings to abandon their nuclear ambitions.

Graphic

 
PHOTO Photo Headshot - (Jimmy) Carter

Load-Date: September 19, 1998


End of Document