White House blasts critic of terror war
 The Atlanta Journal-Constitution
March 23, 2004 Tuesday
Home Edition


Copyright 2004 The Atlanta Journal-Constitution


Section: News;
Length: 637 words
Byline: JULIA MALONE
Body


Washington --- The White House blasted former top terrorism adviser Richard Clarke on Monday in a coordinated effort to rebut his allegations that President Bush botched the U.S. approach to terrorism before and after the attacks of Sept. 11, 2001.
The denunciations of Clarke came a day after Bush's former counterterrorism coordinator charged in an interview on CBS' "60 Minutes" that the president gave short-shrift attention to Osama bin Laden's al-Qaida terrorist network while obsessing over Iraq's Saddam Hussein.
Vice President Dick Cheney countered in a radio interview that Clarke "wasn't in the loop" and said the former aide might have a grudge to bear, since he was moved into a more narrow area of cyberterrorism security.
White House press secretary Scott McClellan derided the former White House adviser, saying, "This is Dick Clarke's 'American grandstand.' " He faulted Clarke for waiting until the heat of the presidential campaign to launch his scathing assessment of Bush's handling of the war on terrorism.
Cox Washington Bureau
Clarke has detailed his charges in a book, "Against All Enemies," and is set to provide some of the most explosive public testimony yet before the national 9/11 commission --- officially the National Commission on Terrorist Attacks Upon the United States --- on Wednesday.
Also scheduled to testify before the commission today and Wednesday are former Secretary of State Madeleine Albright and the current secretary, Colin Powell; former Secretary of Defense William S. Cohen and the current secretary, Donald Rumsfeld; CIA director George Tenet; Deputy Secretary of State Richard Armitage and Sandy Berger, a former assistant to the president for national security affairs.
Clarke, who left his post more than a year ago, claims Bush has made the war against terrorism more difficult by diverting resources and troops to the invasion and occupation of Iraq.
His allegations are similar to those made in a book by fired Treasury Secretary Paul H. O'Neill, who said Bush and his aides were fixated on Iraq from his inauguration in January, 2001.
Even as the White House was responding to Clarke, former President Jimmy Carter added more criticism of Bush's foreign policy. He said in a newspaper interview that the war against Iraq was based on "lies and misinterpretations."
The Bush administration kept its focus on Clarke, however.
"Clearly, this is more about politics and a book promotion than it is about policy," said McClellan, one of several top officials who disputed Clarke's charge that the president had failed to heed his early warnings about the terrorist threat before the Sept. 11 attacks.
National security adviser Condoleezza Rice, making the rounds of morning TV programs, repeatedly reminded viewers that the Bush administration had been in office only eight months when hijacked airliners crashed into the World Trade Center and the Pentagon.
She said Clarke had worked at the White House for every president since Ronald Reagan and had been part of the anti-terrorism effort that failed to detect years of preparation for the attacks, even after al-Qaida assaulted the USS Cole in Yemen and tried to blow up the World Trade Center in 1993.
Rice also said Clarke had failed to come up with a dynamic anti-terrorism strategy as asked early in the Bush presidency. "What he gave me," Rice said, "was a list of five ideas, most of which had been around since 1998."
Former President Carter, in an interview with the British newspaper the Independent, joined in faulting Bush for invading Iraq.
"There was no reason for us to become involved in Iraq recently," he said. "That was a war based on lies and misinterpretations from London and Washington, claiming falsely that Saddam Hussein was responsible for 9/11, claiming falsely that Iraq had weapons of mass destruction."

Graphic

 
Photo: Former counterterrorism adviser Richard Clarke; Photo: Secretary of State Colin Powell; Photo: Defense Secretary Donald Rumsfeld; Photo: Former Secretary of State Madeleine Albright, current Secretary Colin Powell, former counterterrorism adviser Richard Clarke and Defense Secretary Donald Rumsfeld are to testify before the 9/11 commission this week.

Load-Date: March 23, 2004


End of Document