WHO SET OFF THE EMBASSY BLASTS? EXPERTS POINT TO THE MIDDLE EAST
St. Louis Post-Dispatch (Missouri)
August 16, 1998, Sunday, THREE STAR EDITION


Copyright 1998 St. Louis Post-Dispatch, Inc.
Section: NEWS ANALYSIS, Pg. B1
Length: 682 words
Byline: George Gedda; The Associated Press
Dateline: WASHINGTON
Body


It did not take long for the smoke to clear from the twin bombings in Africa before the finger pointing started.
No evidence had been gathered at the sites in Kenya and Tanzania and there had been no credible claims of responsibility. But that did not stop suspicions from being aroused.
Hardly anybody believed that the culprits were Kenyans or Tanzanians, people with no history of bearing anti-American grudges.
The tendency, among the terrorism experts, has been to look outside the region, especially to the Middle East. For years, Islamic groups have been using terror in an effort to remove the American military and diplomatic presence in the region as well as U.S. cultural influence.
Military analyst Harry Summers believes Islamic terrorists were responsible for the Africa bombings. He contended that "untraceable terrorism" is the weapon of choice in their struggle against the United States because conventional warfare is out of the question.
"The Arabs did it," said Robert Kupperman, terrorism expert at the Center for Strategic and International Studies. As possible suspects, he mentioned, in particular, Sudan, "Saudi renegades," Iran and the Iran-backed Islamic Jihad.
Four days after the bombings, the Washington office of the National C ouncil of Resistance of Iran said the early evidence points to Iran, contending that Iranian ambassadors in Kenya and Tanzania had been recalled two weeks before the bombings.
Without absolving Iran, State Department officials discredited the council's thesis, noting that the Iranian ambassador in Tanzania had not left his post.
Patrick Clawson, a terrorism expert at the Washington Institute for Near East Policy, also said Iran could well be a suspect because of the disproportionately large embassy staff he said Iran maintains in Nairobi. He said such an embassy gives Iran the support it needs for a terrorist infrastructure if it were inclined to have one.
 
For the record, Iran has denounced the bombings.
"We condemn the bombings and sympathize with the victims and their families," said Iran's foreign minister, Kamal Kharrazi.
In a similar vein, Sudanese Foreign Minister Mustafa Osman Ismail said, "Such acts as these do not accomplish anything, but victimize innocents."
Iran and Sudan are on the State Department list of countries alleged to sponsor international terrorism. The others are Libya, Syria, Iraq, North Korea and Cuba.
A blame game of sorts was carried out by Tanzanian authorities, who rounded up 14 suspects for questioning a few days after the bombing. None was a Tanzanian native. They included six Iraqis, six Sudanese, one Turk and one Somali.
No sooner had the roundup been carried out than Tanzanian Home Affairs Minister Ali Ameir Mohammed said it should not be taken seriously. "We cannot say we have got somebody who is really responsible," he said.
Commenting on the arrests, Susan Rice, the State Department's top Africa official, said, "Don't attach too much importance to it."
 
Most of the 14 are believed to have been released.
The State Department has not engaged in finger pointing but, without being specific, has made clear it believes that interests outside of East Africa are probably responsible.
Khalil Jahshan, president of the National Association of Arab-Amer icans, said last week that he appreciates the administration's restraint in not blaming Islamic interests for the bombings.
"The administration has not rushed to judgment" and is "very wise to await results," Jahshan said.
Many Arab-Americans were unhappy three years ago when Islamic interests were blamed by the media and in official speculation for the Oklahoma City bombing.
 
The culprits were Americans without Islamic connections.
Privately, administration officials have said it would be foolish to rule out possible involvement by Osama Bin Laden, a Saudi expatriate who has threatened holy war by Islamic fighters against U.S. troops in Saudi Arabia and Americans elsewhere. Suspicion has been directed toward Bin Laden because of the reported arrests - with CIA help - of four Bin Laden allies in Albania earlier this summer.     

Graphic

 
PHOTO (1) AGENCE FRANCE-PRESSE Color Photo - An FBI investigator examines wreckage Thursday from the U.S. Embassy bombing on Aug. 7 in Nairobi, Kenya. Military analyst Harry Summers says he believes Islamic terrorists are responsible for the bombing in Kenya and the U.S. embassy in Tanzania because "untraceable terrorism" is their preferred weapon against the United States.
 (2) THE ASSOCIATED PRESS Color Photo - ABOVE: Rescue workers carry a woman from the rubble of a collapsed building next to the U.S. Embassy in Nairobi, Kenya, on Aug. 7.
 (3) The Associated Press Color Photo - BELOW: The coffins of 10 of the 12 killed Americans are carried onto U.S. soil Thursday at Andrews Air Force Base near Washington.
 (4) THE ASSOCIATED PRESS Photo - Investigators examine the wreckage Thursday of a car bomb suspected in the Aug. 7 blast at the U.S. Embassy in Nairobi, Kenya. Officials have not identified anyone responsible for the bombings.
 (5) THE ASSOCIATED PRESS Photo - ABOVE: U.S. officials suspect exiled Saudi Osama Bin Laden's involvment in the U.S. Embassy bombings in Africa because of his past threats against Americans.
 (6) Agence France-Presse Photo - BELOW: WTN television shows a bank in Nairobi, Kenya, that collapsed when the U.S. Embassy there was bombed.

Load-Date: August 16, 1998


End of Document