Who stands against terrorism?
St. Petersburg Times (Florida)
April 22, 1988, Friday, City Edition


Times Publishing Company
Section: NATIONAL; Pg. 2A; COLUMN
Length: 782 words
Byline: WILBUR G. LANDREY
Body


In the lonely ranks of nations that have stood tall against    terrorism, the small sheikdom of Kuwait stands by itself. It again    refused to release 17 imprisoned Shiite terrorists this week in    exchange for passengers aboard a hijacked Kuwaiti airliner. But when    the hijackers slipped away from Algiers unpunished, they left questions    about who won and who lost.
 
     The United States has pontificated against deals with terrorists,    and then dealt with them. So has France. Even Israel has traded    "terrorists" for hostages. West Germany has refused to extradite a    hijacking suspect to the United States and tried him as "juvenile."
 
   But Kuwait, a traditional Persian Gulf sheikhdom no larger than New    Jersey, so far has resisted every threat and blandishment to release    the 17 Shiite fundamentalists it convicted in 1984 for a series of    attacks on the U.S. and French embassies and local oil and utility    installations.
 
     Most of the kidnapings and hijackings in the Middle East since,    including those of nine Americans, have been aimed at forcing their    release. Kuwait held firm, even when the Reagan administration is    reported to have secretly urged it to relent to secure the release of    the American hostages in Lebanon.
 
     Most Kuwaitis, even the families of some of the hijacked    passengers, are proud of their resistance to terrorist blackmail. They    rejoiced this week when the 31 passengers and crew members finally    walked off the airliner in Algiers with Kuwait again having refused to    release the notorious 17. Some Kuwaitis expressed anger that the    hijackers, having killed two passengers, were allowed to go free.
 
     Reacting angrily to American and other Western criticism, Algerian    officials said Kuwait approved the agreement that ended the 15-day    ordeal. One unconfirmed report said death sentences against three of    the 17 had been commuted; the official Kuwait News Agency denied there    was any deal. Against the background of the Iran-Contra trade of arms    for hostages, the American objections may be regarded as hypocritical.
 
     Until proof to the contrary, we ought to assume that Kuwait's    capable ruler, Emir Jaber al-Ahmed al-Sabah, held as firm this time as    he has in the past.
 
     The hijackers failed to win release of the 17, but they have walked    away free to strike again. Most, it seems, have not even been    identified. For 15 days, they had the eyes and ears of the world. As    long as hijackers get away with even this, hijackings will continue.
 
     It's easy to preach firmness when you or someone you love or know    isn't a hostage. But the only way to end the hijackings is for the    countries of the world, together, to follow Kuwait's example in    refusing to bow to blackmail. Some countries refuse to join a common    defense and collective response. The world in general lacks the will.
 
 
 
 
   LAST WEEKEND'S ASSASSINATION in Tunisia of PLO military chief Khalil    al Wazir brought an outburst of pride and some reassurance in a    troubled Israel celebrating its 40th anniversary this week. It struck a    hard blow against the Palestine Liberation Organization. But Wazir dead    may be as dangerous for the Jewish state as Wazir alive.
 
     PLO chief Yasser Arafat did not attend the funeral in Damascus    Wednesday of his long-time companion, a sign of the continued feud with    Syrian President Hafez Assad. But, surprisingly, Assad invited him, and    negotiations seem still to be going on to patch things up between the    PLO and Syria.
 
     On the West Bank and Gaza, the killing of Wazir has only created    another martyr.
 
 
   Tunisia complained to the U.N. Security Council Wednesday. Having    condemned both the assassination and Israel's expulsion of eight more    Palestinians from the West Bank this week, the United States will again    be in an embarrassing position if U.N. censure comes to a vote. Again    it will have to choose between its conscience and the fear of Israel's    American lobby. These decisions separate leaders from mere politicians.
 
 American governments usually fail the test by vetoing any clear U.N.    condemnation.
 
     In Israel itself, former Defense Minister Ezer Weizman noted that    the assassination of "Abu Jihad" broke an unwritten agreement not to    attack PLO leaders.
 
     "The fact is we have never done so," Weizman is quoted as saying.    "Why now?" And he told Israeli Radio:        "It doesn't contribute to the fight against terrorism. In    principle it creates more. It distances the peace process and will    bring greater hostility and make us more vulnerable around the world."
 
    

Graphic

 
BLACK AND WHITE PHOTO, (2); Jaber al-Ahmed al-Sabah; Khalil at Wazir

Load-Date: November 11, 1992


End of Document