Who won the presidential debate?
The Wilson Daily Times (North Carolina)
October 23, 2012 Tuesday


Copyright 2012 The Wilson Daily Times
Distributed by McClatchy-Tribune Business News
Section: STATE AND REGIONAL NEWS
Length: 731 words
Byline: Corey Friedman, The Wilson Daily Times, N.C.
Body


Oct. 23--The commander-in-chief and his chief challenger tussled over terrorism, military spending and America's place in the world Monday night.
President Barack Obama and Republican challenger Mitt Romney traded barbs in the third and final presidential debate at Lynn University in Boca Raton, Fla. Wilson County's Democratic and Republican leaders each felt that their candidate made a compelling case.
"I think the president did an outstanding job, and how could he not?" county Democratic Party Chairman Asa Gregory said. "The focus is on foreign policy. I think he understands what needs to happen with the military, being the commander-in-chief for the last four years."
Wilson County GOP Chairman Gary Proffitt expressed disappointment with the debate as a whole, but he said Romney "stepped up to the plate" and addressed difficult issues.
"I think he stood his ground," Proffitt said. "I don't know necessarily if either candidate won this debate. There was so much rambling going on."
Wooing Wilson County voters could help Obama keep the White House or help Romney send the president packing. Wilson is one of 13 North Carolina counties up for grabs among swing-voting cities and counties in nine states.
"President Obama promised change four years ago. That change has not happened," Proffitt said. "I think Wilsonians realize that and they're going to vote quite differently in November."
Wilson, Wake, Pitt and 10 other North Carolina counties voted for George W. Bush in 2004 and Obama in 2008. The Associated Press identified 106 swing-voting communities in North Carolina, Colorado, Florida, Iowa, Nevada, New Hampshire, Ohio, Virginia and Wisconsin.
Democrats have a more than 2-to-1 advantage over Republicans in voter registration, but Wilson County's seen its number of unaffiliated voters climb by 35.4 percent since 2008.
"Four years ago, Wilson County was one of two counties left counting at the end of the night, and I think that's going to happen again," Gregory said. "It is one of those counties that will help determine the election."
Obama spoke for 41 minutes, 42 seconds, while Romney talked for 41 minutes, 7 seconds. Proffitt said moderator Bob Schieffer of CBS News did a poor job keeping the candidates on topic.
"I'm very disappointed," Proffitt said. "I thought this debate was supposed to be about foreign policy, and it began early on about local economic issues."
Romney pointed out that the U.S. Navy has fewer ships now than in 1916. Obama's tongue-in-cheek reply drew swift laughter.
"Well, Governor, we also have fewer horses and bayonets," Obama said, "because the nature of our military's changed."
Romney accused Obama of embarking on an "apology tour" to the Middle East and "criticizing America."
"This has been probably the biggest whopper that's been told during the course of this campaign," Obama shot back.
Romney turned the tables in his rebuttal, reciting the president's past words and coining a memorable phrase.
"(I)n those nations and on Arabic TV, you said that America had been dismissive and derisive," Romney said. "You said that, on occasion, America had dictated to other nations. Mr. President, America has not dictated to other nations. We have freed other nations from dictators."
The first question touched on the terror attack that killed four Americans, including the United States ambassador to Libya, at a consulate in Benghazi, Libya, on the 11th anniversary of 9/11.
Obama had initially said that protests over an anti-Muslim YouTube video fueled a spontaneous attack at the consulate, but he later acknowledged that the killings resulted from premeditated terrorism.
"When we received that phone call, I immediately made sure that, No. 1, we did everything we could to secure those Americans who were still in harm's way," Obama said during the debate, "No. 2, that we would investigate exactly what happened; and No. 3, most importantly, that we would go after those who killed Americans and we would bring them to justice, and that's exactly what we're going to do."
Romney countered that the consulate attack reflects rising instability in the region following the Arab Spring, which saw regime changes in Libya, Egypt, Tunisia and Yemen.
corey@wilsontimes.com -- 265-7813
___ (c)2012 The Wilson Daily Times (Wilson, N.C.) Visit The Wilson Daily Times (Wilson, N.C.) at www.wilsontimes.com Distributed by MCT Information Services

Load-Date: October 24, 2012


End of Document