WHO IS A TERRORIST?; A LOOK AT WHAT'S BEHIND THE EVENTS THAT SHAPED THE WORLD
Dayton Daily News (Ohio)
July 27, 2016 Wednesday


Distributed by Newsbank, Inc. All Rights Reserved
Copyright 2016 Cox Ohio Publishing. 
Section: WEEKLY EXPLAINER; Pg. AA1
Length: 822 words
Body


In December 2014, a middle-aged man driving a car in Dijon, France, mowed down more than a dozen pedestrians within 30 minutes, occasionally shouting Islamic slogans from his window. The chief prosecutor in Dijon described the attacks, which left 13 injured but no one dead, as the work of a mentally unbalanced man whose motivations were vague and “hardly coherent.” A year and a half later, after Mohamed Lahouaiej Bouhlel slaughtered dozens of people when he drove a 19-ton refrigerated truck through a Bastille Day celebration in Nice, France, the authorities did not hesitate to call it an act of Islamic terrorism. The attacker had a record of petty crime though no obvious ties to a terrorist group but the French prime minister swiftly said Lahouaiej Bouhlel was “a terrorist probably linked to radical Islam one way or another.”
Rush to judgment 
Instances of wanton violence by deranged attackers  whether in Nice or in Orlando, Florida  are swiftly judged to be the work of terrorists. These judgments occur even when there is little immediate evidence that the attackers had direct ties to terrorist groups and when they do not fit a classic definition of terrorists as those who use violence to advance a political agenda. 
“A lot of this stuff is at the fringes of what we would historically think of as terrorism,” said Daniel Benjamin, a former State Department coordinator for counterterrorism and a professor at Dartmouth College. But, he said, “the Islamic State and jihadism has become a kind of refuge for some unstable people who are at the end of their rope and decide they can redeem their screwed-up lives” by dying in the name of a cause. 
Benjamin said this also led the news media and government officials to treat violence like the Nice attack differently from other mass attacks, like shootings at schools and churches that have been carried out by non-Muslims. 
“If there is a mass killing, and there is a Muslim involved, all of a sudden it is by definition terrorism,” he said. 
Islamic State’s role 
The spectrum of terrorism is widening, and now includes attacks loosely inspired by the Islamic State, those carried out by its affiliate groups and attacks directed by the group’s leadership. All have drawn public condemnation and concern, but the plots organized and executed by the Islamic State usually prompt greater concern from the authorities. 
A bulletin on the Islamic State’s Amaq News Agency channel has described Lahouaiej Bouhlel as a “soldier of the Islamic State” who answered a call to attack nations involved in the military campaign against the group. But the bulletin gave no specifics about the extent of the attacker’s ties to the terrorist network. 
On one hand, there is now good reason for government officials to make immediate assumptions after some mass killings that the Islamic State has played a role, however indirect. The group’s ideology, spread widely through social media and slick propaganda videos, appears to have inspired a scourge of violence for more than a year  including the shootings in December in San Bernardino, California; the mass killings last month at a gay nightclub in Orlando; and the deadly attack early this month at a cafe in Bangladesh. These were in addition to attacks that top Islamic State operatives apparently planned directly, like the Paris assaults in November and the Brussels bombings in March. 
A strategy’s limits 
Governments also see a benefit in linking the Islamic State to what are sometimes random and unconnected acts of violence. It is a way to project order amid chaos, and to try to assure jittery citizens that there is a strategy to end the violence. 
U.S. officials have cited progress in the military campaign as a measure of success in draining the Islamic State’s power, resources and influence. Brett H. McGurk, President Barack Obama’s special envoy in the fight against the Islamic State, recently told Congress that the group had lost 47 percent of its territory in Iraq and 20 percent in Syria  territory used to extract oil from the ground and taxes from its residents, as well as to plot attacks against the West. 
But terrorism experts caution that because the Islamic State seems to have broad appeal to the mentally unbalanced, the displaced and others on the fringes of society, there are limits to how much any military campaign in Syria and Iraq can reduce violence carried out in other countries on the group’s behalf. 
William McCants, a scholar at the Brookings Institution and the author of “The ISIS Apocalypse,” said there was a large cadre of “men and women who have no organizational ties to ISIS but murder in its name.” 
“As for how governments can calm their citizens, I’m at a loss,” McCants said. “Every attack is discussed endlessly on television and social media, which heightens fear of future attacks, makes citizens scared of one another” and puts pressure on governments to look tough, he said.

Graphic

 
DAVID RAMOS/GETTY IMAGES">THE AFTERMATCH: People visit the scene and place tributes to the victims of a terror attack on the Promenade des Anglais on July 15 in Nice, France. A French-Tunisian attacker killed 84 people as he drove a lorry through crowds, gathered to watch a firework display during Bastille Day Celebrations. The attacker then opened fire on the crowd before being shot dead by police. The driver had no apparent ties to terrorist organizations, but French authorities called the attack terrorism.

Load-Date: November 30, 2023


End of Document