Who Bears The Risks Of Terror?
The New York Times
July 10, 2005 Sunday
Late Edition - Final


Copyright 2005 The New York Times Company
Section: Section 3; Column 1; SundayBusiness; Pg. 1; ECONOMIC VIEW
Length: 1050 words
Byline: By Edmund L. Andrews
Dateline: WASHINGTON 
Body


IF nothing else, the synchronized bombings and bloodshed in London on Thursday will stifle any creeping complacency about the risks of terrorist attacks.
  The London bombings dovetail with a major political battle, just starting in Washington, about how to deal with that risk. Specifically, should the federal government continue to be the main provider of terrorism risk insurance?
At issue is the Terrorism Risk Insurance Act, which was enacted in response to the terrorist attacks of Sept. 11, 2001, and is set to expire at the end of this year.
  The law obligates the government to reimburse insurance companies for most of their insured losses -- up to $100 billion a year -- that arise from terrorism.
  The issue is crucial to New York City, which bore the brunt of the Sept. 11 attacks, as well as to other major cities like Los Angeles and Chicago that offer high-visibility targets.
  Insurance companies, commercial real estate developers, construction companies and virtually all of New York's political and business leadership are lobbying hard for a renewal.
  But the Bush administration and Congressional Republican leaders are opposed to extending the legislation. In a report on June 30, the Treasury Department declared that private insurers were ready to shoulder the task and that the government should get out of the way.
  Representative Tom DeLay of Texas, the House majority leader, immediately endorsed that conclusion, saying that ''any solution must depend on the ingenuity of private insurance markets.'' And the Senate majority leader, Bill Frist of Tennessee, said that the need for federal help had ''run its course.''
  Part of the political battle now is between urban and Democratic-leaning states, like New York and California, and Republican-leaning states in the Midwest and South that may have fewer high-profile targets.
  But the battle also poses fundamental economic questions about who should bear risks against catastrophic events.
  Insurance companies offer protection against losses from hurricanes and earthquakes. What is so different about terrorism? And if taxpayers foot the bill for terrorism losses, will companies that face such threats have less incentive to bolster their security in advance?
  Supporters of the current law contend that the potential losses are so big and so unpredictable that private insurance would either become prohibitively expensive or dry up. If that happened, they warn, commercial development in major cities would slow to a crawl, businesses would relocate and jobs would disappear.
  The attacks of 9/11 did set new records for a catastrophe. Total insured losses, including property, life and liability claims, are expected to total $31.7 billion, according to the Insurance Information Institute. That would far eclipse the $20 billion in property losses that stemmed from Hurricane Andrew in 1992.
  Indeed, one vocal supporter of extending the federal law is R. Glenn Hubbard, a former chairman of President Bush's Council of Economic Advisers who is now dean of the Graduate School of Business at Columbia University.
  A report last year by Mr. Hubbard and Bruce Deal, a principal of the Analysis Group consultancy, warned that ''the extreme and unpredictable losses associated with catastrophic terrorism cannot be borne by the private sector alone.'' The report was financed by the insurance industry.
  Failure to renew the law, Mr. Hubbard and Mr. Deal said, would cost the overall economy about $53 billion in lost economic activity and lead to 326,000 fewer jobs.
  But the actual evidence is less clear. Despite the breathtaking losses that property and casualty insurers shouldered in 2001, the losses were hardly off the charts, and their overall financial position is as strong today as it was before the attacks.
  THE ''combined ratio'' -- the ratio of insured losses to income from premiums for property and casualty insurers -- soared to 115 percent in 2001. But that was no higher than after Hurricane Andrew in 1992 and lower than in two other years. 
  To be sure, one effect of Hurricane Andrew was that insurance companies significantly scaled back the coverage they offered. That could happen in the case of terrorism insurance. Indeed, the Treasury Department predicted in its report that the short-term effect of ending the federal terrorism insurance program would be less insurance provided, and at higher prices. In the long term, it added, ''we expect that the private market will develop additional terrorism insurance capacity.'' 
  Since 2001, property and casualty companies have bounced back very well. Income from premiums has climbed, investment returns have increased and the industry's net worth reached a new high in 2004 of $369 billion -- $50 billion higher than it was in 2000, the year before the 9/11 attacks, according to the Congressional Budget Office.
  One of the leading critics of terrorism risk insurance is Kent Smetters, now an associate professor at the Wharton School of the University of Pennsylvania, who helped design the original program while at the Treasury Department.
  ''The fact is that insurers were coming back into the market, and they are being driven out because of the law,'' he said in an interview.
  At a conference on Friday sponsored by the American Enterprise Institute, a conservative research organization here, Mr. Smetters noted that insurance losses from product liability claims have been many times higher than those from terrorism, yet insurance companies still offer product liability insurance.
  Mr. Smetters added that the uncertainty surrounding terrorist attacks is not necessarily that much higher than that surrounding earthquakes and hurricanes.
  But the biggest question is this: If the government essentially offers free terrorism insurance, is the nation as a whole deluding itself about the potential costs? If the insurance is free, would companies be tempted to cut corners on security because they didn't have to worry about higher premiums or deductibles? 
  And there is the issue for taxpayers: Unlike an insurance company, Congress is not about to set aside tens of billions of dollars to cover potential losses in the future. If there were a repeat of Sept. 11, the cost would all be borne in the form of future budget deficits.


http://www.nytimes.com

Graphic

 
Chart: ''Insurers' Recovery''Graph tracks property and casualty insurers' net worth, measured in billions, from 1994 through first nine months of 2004.(Source by Congressional Budget Office)

Load-Date: July 10, 2005


End of Document