Whose Terror Teams, Mr. Arafat?
The New York Times
June 1, 1990, Friday, Late Edition - Final


Copyright 1990 The New York Times Company
Section: Section A; Page 28, Column 1; Editorial Desk; Editorial
Length: 486 words
Body


It was not just another random raid by Arab zealots. The Palestinian terror teams intercepted by Israeli forces as they tried to land on civilian beaches Wednesday were part of a carefully planned, elaborately equipped attack. That blunt fact forces Yasir Arafat to make a fundamental choice: Take strong action against the responsible terrorist faction of his Palestine Liberation Organization or forfeit direct dialogue with the United States, thus his best chance to advance the Palestinian cause.
Although Mr. Arafat denies involvement in the raid, the Bush Administration has told Mr. Arafat that he must condemn Abul Abbas, who claims credit for dispatching the hit team, and expel him from the P.L.O. Executive Council. President Bush can do no less. The U.S. is pledged to cancel direct contacts with the P.L.O. if Mr. Arafat cannot keep his vow of December 1988 to forgo sponsorship of and association with terrorism.
The credibility of three parties is at stake. Mr. Bush has resisted recent Israeli charges that the P.L.O. remains in the terrorist business, arguing that the evidence is ambiguous. Now, unless Mr. Arafat completely disassociates himself from Abul Abbas, there can be no ambiguity. The President cannot let Mr. Arafat off the hook, and retain the confidence of Americans and Israelis who want Mr. Bush to press for peace talks.
Arab credibility is also on the line. The Abul Abbas spokesmen say the hit team was launched to avenge the killing of seven Palestinians on May 20 by an Israeli. But the killer was not an instrument of the Israeli Government. He is a deranged man whose act is condemned by all Israelis. For moderate Arab leaders to equate the two events is to damage their reputations and credibility.
These leaders have just lost the chance to do good by endorsing the Baghdad communique of the Arab summit meeting just ended. That communique unfairly blames Washington for failing to press Israel toward negotiations with Palestinians. It also crudely and wrongly condemns Israel's right to receive Jews from the Soviet Union.
If the moderates truly wished to advance the Palestinian cause, they would restrict their criticism to Israel's settling of immigrants in the occupied territories. Moderate Arabs will not help the cause by condoning terrorism in any fashion, or by standing silent. They can help by keeping all parties focused on the need for negotiations.
Here is where Israeli credibility is being tested as well. As soon as a new Israeli government is formed, Mr. Bush will have every reason to push it hard to deal with the realities of Palestinian nationalism and Palestinian rights.
But before anyone else's credibility can be tested, Yasir Arafat has to define himself by the way he responds to the terrorist raid. If he wants Palestinians to have a place at the negotiating table and a place in their own sun, he will have to choose the olive branch, and not the gun.


End of Document