Why students should consider platforms on terrorism when voting this November
Daily Collegian: Pennsylvania State University
September 8, 2016 Thursday


University Wire
Copyright 2016 UWIRE via U-Wire All Rights Reserved
Section: NEWS; Pg. 1
Length: 636 words
Byline: Samantha Lauriello
Body


On a campus many students call home, the air of small-town safety may make it easy to forget an issue that serves as a major threat to the country - terrorism.
Keeping in mind the 300 study abroad programs Penn State offers each year, Michael Straw, president of the College Republicans, explained what students should be mindful of when voting for a new "commander in chief" this November.
Straw (senior-political science and economics) said a stark contrast between the two candidates' platforms is that Hillary Clinton supports President Obama's executive actions regarding terrorism, while Donald Trump condemns them.
"In all of our country's history, there is no parallel to what President Obama and his former Secretary of State have done to weaken our nation," the official website for the Republican Party states.
Though Trump has not released a comprehensive plan for fighting terrorism, Straw said, he has made it clear that he intends to take out the Islamic State and put an end to terrorism.
Trump also made clear his intentions to fight ISIS alongside Russia, Straw said, a major contrast to Clinton's proposed strategy.
According to the Grand Old Party website, the Republican platform is based on rebuilding the strength of the nation's military by abandoning a "budget-based" strategy and adopting one that holds the country's security priority.
The GOP also supports abandoning of arms control treaties that they don't see as advancing national security, developing of a "multi-layered missile defense system" and ending Mutually Assured Destruction, according to the website.
In addition to rebuilding the military, the GOP plans to address terrorism by securing the nation's borders and placing exceptional scrutiny on those who wish to enter from regions housing Islamic terrorism, the website states.
These policies, many of which are in contrast with those of the Obama administration, don't correlate with Clinton's "interventionist approach," Straw said.
Clinton has proposed working alongside Middle Easterners in the United States in an effort to prevent the conversion to extremists, O'Neill Kennedy, communications chair for the College Democrats, said.
Trump makes Middle Easterners feel unwelcome, which gives them motivation to rebel, Kennedy said. Clinton wants to make them feel included in the solution, she added.
Another way she plans to do so is by encouraging Muslim community centers to reach out to their surrounding communities, Kennedy said.
Across seas, Clinton is in favor of a no fly zone over Syria, Kennedy said, in an effort to aid those trying to flee violence. She also supports increased boots on the ground, Kennedy said.
or tags on article template page. The placement should appear just "below-the-fold", meaning that a user needs to scroll down slightly to see the video. Be sure that if you article page also has an "inline" ad unit that plays within the text that the two ad units do not overlap. */ -->
While the official website for the Democratic Party praises the strength of American troops, it does state its commitment to modernizing and strengthening the nation's military.
The website states the party is dedicated to "investing heavily in intelligence and information sharing and promoting those networks among our allies."
In addition, keeping nuclear weapons out of the reach of terrorists is another ideal stressed on the website.
Straw said security and weakening terrorist groups should be in the front of student's minds when voting this fall.
Brittany Acosta (sophomore-economics) said terrorism is making students a lot less comfortable with the thought of going abroad.
Students should be concerned about this because it could not only affect their studies, but their freedom, Acosta said.
To email reporter: sjl5429@psu.edu
Follow her on Twitter at @_samlauriello.

Load-Date: January 17, 2018


End of Document