Why add woman to FBI's wanted list 40 years later?; Case not about national security but politics
USA TODAY
May 7, 2013 Tuesday
FINAL EDITION


Copyright 2013 Gannett Company, Inc. All Rights Reserved
Section: NEWS; Pg. 6A
Length: 528 words
Byline: DeWayne Wickham
Body


I would have loved to have been a fly on the wall when the FBI decided to place  Assata Shakur as the first woman on its list of most wanted terrorists, which has included Osama bin Laden, Ayman al-Zawahri and other purveyors of mass mayhem.
The FBI's decision last week to dredge up the 40-year-old case of a convicted cop killer, whose given name is Joanne Chesimard,  is not about national security but politics. The revival of the case appears to revert to the playbook of the agency's domestic counterintelligence  program (COINTELPRO).
Shakur has spent the past 29 years holed up in Cuba after escaping prison in the murder of New Jersey trooper Werner Foerster. Foerster was killed in a 1973 shootout on the New Jersey Turnpike that also took the life of Zayd Malik Shakur, who was riding in a car along with Sundiata Acoli and Assata Shakur. Their vehicle was stopped by Foerster and another trooper, police say, because one of its tail lights was out. Last week, New Jersey marked the 40th anniversary of Foerster's death by doubling the reward for Shakur's capture to $2 million.
Black power group
The three people in the car were members of the Black Liberation Army, one of many black organizations whose activities the FBI distorted in a secret campaign of disinformation that lasted 15 years until COINTELPRO was exposed and ended in 1971.
While the FBI created its list of most wanted terrorists in 2002, it waited 11 years to put her on it. Why? Probably because the agency's decision was as politicized as when Director J. Edgar Hoover launched the controversial COINTELPRO.
FBI, State link?
The FBI's announcement last week came a day after the State Department said it would not remove Cuba from its list of countries that sponsor terrorism, a list that includes Iran, Sudan and Syria. Cuba has been on this list since 1982.  But there has been no credible proof that Cuba has supported terrorism in recent years. The crime Shakur was found guilty of does not fit that definition of terrorism.
In fact, Cuba stopped sending weapons and soldiers abroad to support leftist causes long ago. The communist government now sends thousands of doctors throughout Africa and Central and South America to court political support.
There's no coincidence that the FBI decided to add Shakur to the terrorists list at the same time the State Department continued to brand Cuba as a state sponsor of terrorism.
"We ought to reserve that term for nations that actually use the apparatus of statehood to support targeting of U.S. interests and civilians," Juliette Kayyem, a Harvard lecturer who is a former senior official in the Obama administration's Department of Homeland Security, told the Los Angeles Times. "Yes, Cuba does a lot of bad things that we don't like, but it doesn't rise to anything on the level of a terrorist threat," she added.
Just as the FBI's COINTELPRO used misinformation in an attempt to destroy some black organizations and create a false reality about others, the bureau's effort to recast Shakur as an international terrorist should be seen for what it is: proof that the FBI has gone rogue again.
DeWayne Wickham writes on Tuesdays for USA TODAY. 

Load-Date: May 7, 2013


End of Document