Why Waver on Decency in Chile?
The New York Times
December 3, 1986, Wednesday, Late City Final Edition


Copyright 1986 The New York Times Company
Section: Section A; Page 30, Column 1; Editorial Desk; Editorial
Length: 296 words
Body


Washington's credibility as an active supporter of decency and democracy in Chile is on the line again this week, as the United Nations moves toward a final vote on a resolution condemning that country's abuses of human rights. Last month, the Administration backed off its threat to vote against a World Bank loan for Chile.
In a recent U.N. subcommittee vote, the United States joined Chile, Paraguay, Indonesia and Lebanon in opposing the resolution.
Most of America's European allies not only voted in favor but also sought compromise language to meet Washington's stated objections. These objections, in essence, are that the resolution fails to cite terrorism on the left as an impediment to democratic change, fails adequately to recognize the extent of Chile's cooperation with U.N. recommendations and insists on criticizing the 1980 Pinochet constitution, which the United States argues should be treated as an internal matter.
Such objections could be taken more seriously if they were consistently applied. Does armed rebellion excuse Afghanistan's abuses of its citizens? Is Nicaragua's proposed Sandinista constitution considered off-limits to external criticism?
The Reagan Administration seems to be edging away from its own enlightened policies in support of democratic change in Chile. Yes, the Administration is right that the Communists seem to be gaining ground. And armed terrorism is now making alarming inroads in a country once known for political stability and tolerance. But that is the fruit of the Pinochet regime's intransigence and unwillingness to contemplate easing its grip after 13 years of undemocratic rule.
Protecting that regime from its critics is hardly likely to induce it to change its ways. Washington would do well to reconsider its vote.


End of Document