Why White House Plays the Libya Card
The New York Times
May 5, 1992, Tuesday, Late Edition - Final


Copyright 1992 The New York Times Company
Distribution: Editorial Desk
Section: Section A;; Section A; Page 30; Column 4; Editorial Desk; Column 4;; Letter
Length: 363 words
Body


To the Editor:
Accusing Libya of involvement in terrorism is not new. Libya has been linked with incidents before, along with other Muslim countries: Iraq, Syria, Lebanon and Iran.
What is new in the case of the bombing of Pan Am Flight 103 over Lockerbie, Scotland, as well as the explosion on a French DC-10, is that Libya is being held solely responsible. With sanctions now imposed (front page, April 15), the United Nations has been brought in to do the dirty work of the British-American alliance against the Muslim world and third world countries.
Before the Lockerbie incident, United States, British and French leaders were harassing Libya and threatening military force. Attacking Libya keeps the issue of international terrorism alive without upsetting the West's Arab allies, Egypt and Saudi Arabia. Terrorism, like Islamic fundamentalism, has proved a useful excuse for pouncing on third world leaders unpopular in the West or keeping leaders friendly to the West in power.
Libya is a convenient and convincing punching bag. Syria is also still listed as a terrorist state by the United States, despite its cooperation during and after the Persian Gulf war. Syria will be a bogy again when it is convenient for United States foreign and domestic policy objectives.
Ronald Reagan came to office in 1981 gunning for the Libyan leader, Col. Muammar el-Qaddafi. He used Libya's alleged tendency to terrorism to shore up his popularity and protect his rearmament program against cuts by Congress. President Bush took up Mr. Reagan's policies in the Middle East. Mr. Bush now asserts the same anti-Libyan policy when he threatens military force and plans to use the United Nations and international law to achieve his ends.
Since the end of the gulf war, the powerful Western leaders believe they can achieve any end through the United Nations. The United Nations is once again being used to prove it is a Western establishment working to protect Western interests.
What will make this policy succeed against Libya and third world countries is the silence of the American people.
 
BADI M. ALI
Chairman, Islamic Committee for Palestine -- North Carolina
Greensboro, N.C., April 15, 1992

Load-Date: May 5, 1992


End of Document