Why new terrorism alert didn't faze the market;
Why the markets weren't fazed by new terrorism alert
 The Philadelphia Inquirer
AUGUST 3, 2004 Tuesday CITY-D EDITION


Copyright 2004 Philadelphia Newspapers, LLC  All Rights Reserved


Section: BUSINESS; Pg. C01
Length: 646 words
Byline: Jeff Brown
Body


Newspapers all over the country carried headlines yesterday such as the one in The Inquirer that said "Business Zones on Terror Alert." Among the most likely targets of new terrorist attacks, according to the Bush administration: the New York Stock Exchange and other financial buildings in the New York area and Washington.
How many of us saw those stories and thought, Oh, no, this is going to be an awful day for stocks?
But it wasn't. The Dow Jones industrial average dipped a few points just after the opening but showed no sign of panic. Well before 11 a.m., the index was showing a slight gain. It meandered for much of the day and ended up 39 points.
Why such a shrug of the shoulders?
There are plenty of possible explanations:
Crying wolf. We've heard lots of government warnings about terrorist threats that didn't materialize. Perhaps we don't believe them anymore. Maybe people think the Bush administration was just trying to rekindle the kind of circling-the-wagons support it enjoyed after Sept. 11, 2001.
Market resilience. Maybe investors think the exchanges and other financial institutions have installed such good back-up systems since 9/11 that a new attack won't disrupt trading.
Confidence. Perhaps we think our security forces are good enough to thwart a major attack. Terrorists must have wanted to hit us again during the last three years. For some reason, they weren't able to.
Head in the sand. Maybe some think of 9/11 as an aberration and view terrorism as something that mainly happens to other people.
I'm sure all these explanations played into yesterday's market results to some extent. But there's probably a stronger reason the markets didn't seem to worry: They had already accounted for heightened terrorism danger.
The financial markets are a kind of ecosystem, constantly evolving to meet changes in climate. Three years ago, the thought of a terrorist attack in New York would have been a shocker; today, it's part of the environment we've come to live with.
Reading the paper yesterday morning, my wife wondered aloud whether she should go to her job, just a few blocks from the New York Stock Exchange. On 9/11, she was en route to the World Trade Center when the buildings collapsed.
After thinking about it for a few minutes, she went to work - figuring that, even if there were another attack in that area, it wasn't likely to come yesterday.
We're used to terrorist threats now. We make a gut calculation of the odds, and go about our business.
That's not to say an attack wouldn't hurt the nation and the markets. Of course it would.
But even the worst terrorist attack we can imagine would not demolish our economy, put entire industries out of business, or cause the financial markets to collapse. And on any given day, the worst imaginable attack probably won't occur. The markets have long since incorporated those odds into their assessment of future stock prices, and the weekend warning didn't change the calculation.
The fact that we've come to accept terrorism as part of life's background noise is sad, a kind of lost innocence. But it's not surprising: People in many other countries long ago learned to live with such threats, long-term.
Though we talk about the "war on terrorism," more and more of us are coming to realize it's not a war that can be won in the conventional sense. After all, if military might and national resolve could eliminate terrorism, the Israelis would have done it.
Terrorists, unlike soldiers, don't have a central command that can order them to surrender. Unlike armies, they don't need vast resources that can be marshaled only with government support.
Fighting terrorists is less like fighting a war than fighting crime. We may minimize terrorism, but we're not going to eliminate it.
Yesterday, the financial markets were telling us we've come to grips with the fact that terrorism may always be with us.

Notes

On Personal Finance

Load-Date: August 30, 2005


End of Document