Why use Navy Jack in terrorism photo?
INTELLIGENCER JOURNAL (LANCASTER, PA.)
April 2, 2003, Wednesday


Copyright 2003 Lancaster Newspapers, Inc.
Section: EDITORIAL,; LETTERS
Length: 399 words
Body


TO THE EDITOR:
Although I have no specific issue with the article "Tips for fighting terrorism," (Intell, March 26), I wish to express my disappointment with the newspaper's choice of photo to accompany it, as well as the implications of the photo itself.
The photo shows Lancaster city police officer Theodore Makauskas in front of a projected image presenting information on "Anti-government groups." One must presume within this context that such groups -- whose listed characteristics include "Gun Rights," "Constitutional Issues," and "Loss of Sovereignty" -- are included among the terrorist organizations covered by Officer Makauskas and Sgt. Bill Gleason in their presentation. The list of characteristics is displayed next to an image of the First Navy Jack, a historic flag of the American Revolution that features a rattlesnake over a red-and-white striped background and the phrase "Don't Tread On Me." The First Navy Jack, and the similar yellow Gadsden flag, are longstanding and famous symbols of the American ideals of independence and autonomy. To imply that this symbol -- or the aforementioned characteristics of "anti-government groups" -- is tantamount to terrorist activities or sentiments is to undermine the spirit of the American Revolution and the standards of freedom and liberty espoused by the Framers.
#STRAUB.MARS2l#
Furthermore, it may interest the city police (or whatever organization that created the image shown in the photo) to know that under the command of Navy Secretary Gordon England, all Navy ships will fly the First Navy Jack until the conclusion of the War on Terrorism. It would be irony too thick to cut with a knife if this dignified flag is viewed as a possible symbol of terrorism by domestic law enforcement organizations.
Dave Straub, Lancaster
Editor's note: The First Navy Jack, emblazoned with a snake and the slogan "Don't Tread On Me," has been widely co-opted by many anti-government groups in America, such as the Freemen in Montana, that do not recognize much of the authority claimed and exercised by the federal government. It is in this context that the flag in question and its logo were part of the terrorism awareness seminar.  The seminar and the material presented were developed by the Pennsylvania Commission on Crime and Delinquency as part of its CAT Eyes (Community Anti-Terrorism) Training, not the Lancaster Bureau of Police.

Load-Date: April 3, 2003


End of Document