Why hasn't Hasan been tried?
Richmond Times Dispatch (Virginia)
April 1, 2013 Monday
State Edition


Copyright 2013 Richmond Newspapers, Inc. All Rights Reserved
Section: EDITORIAL; Pg. A-08
Length: 647 words
Body


Why hasn't Hasan been tried?
Editor, Times-Dispatch:
In 2009, Army psychiatrist Maj. Nidal Malik Hasan murdered 12 innocent Americans and injured 32 others in an act of terror at Fort Hood Army Base. That was more than three years ago.
As of this date, Hasan still has not been court-martialed or even tried by a military court for this terror attack. The Obama Administration refuses to call this an act of terror or terrorism. As matter of fact the words "terror" and "terrorism" rarely appear in the president's vocabulary.
It would behoove Congress to initiate a congressional investigation as to why, what and who are causing the delay of Hasan's trial. The victims and their families at Fort Hood have demanded that this attack be labeled as terrorism.
As a veteran of the Korean and Vietnam Wars, I resent this delay by the Obama administration to bring this terrorist to justice.
Col. Al Eisner, USA (Ret.).
Silver Spring, Md.
Health issues another reason to go green
Editor, Times-Dispatch:
Tom Eaton got one thing right in his letter, "Greenies are channeling Betty Boop" - something must be done to fill the void that will be left as we wean our energy industries from fossil fuels. But he is wrong when he states that there are no viable alternatives. Wind and solar are both viable alternatives that are being successfully used across the United States and around the world. Just because Virginia's rate of solar installations is tied for last place does not mean that it is not a viable alternative. Studies estimate that Virginia could meet almost 20 percent of today's demand just from solar. Our problem is that Dominion is not investing in renewable energy in Virginia.
Eaton is also wrong to imply that the only reason to move to clean renewable energy is because of the impact of global climate change. Public health is directly impacted by the use of dirty fuels to generate electricity. Virginia currently ranks sixth in the nation for health impacts from coal plants and Richmond was the asthma capital of the U.S. in 2010 and 2011, according to the Asthma and Allergy Foundation of America. Dirty power plants are causing real health issues today. We can do better. The time is now for Dominion to start serious investment in clean, renewable energy here in Virginia.
Kirk Brandt.
Herndon.
Green energy isn't affordable
Editor, Times-Dispatch:
Regarding Courtney Larrik's letter, "Dominion should invest in wind, solar energy," the response is simple. As consumers, we would all like to demand that companies use more environmentally friendly mechanisms, especially for the mass production of energy. However, we simply cannot afford this notion of going green.
Any given windmill only runs 33 percent of the year. Energy related to cost is measured in megawatt/hr, and one megawatt serves 700 homes. Bear Garden Power Station cost $660 million to build, but the nuclear facility produces 660 megawatts/hr, whereas a solar plant produces 4 megawatts/hour, and would cost significantly more. The nuclear plant is more than 150 times more efficient and it costs less.
As for solar, wind and hydro power, Dominion is already investing in it. Locally, 13 miles offshore of Virginia Beach, Dominion has invested in two windmills to serve as prototypes to determine if offshore wind power is even possible for Virginia. These windmills will only produce 10 megawatts/hr, at a cost of $770 million to build. The price comparison between the Virginia Beach windmills and Bear Garden with regard to efficiency speaks for itself.
Under the Clean Air Act, Dominion already must abide by regulations set forth to ensure emissions have been extensively reduced since 1929. If we lost all coal, nuclear and gas powered energy sources, costs would quadruple and the country could not sustain its energy needs. Areas would be entirely blacked out while bills skyrocketed.
Ryan Morelli.
Chesterfield.

Notes

LETTERS TO THE EDITOR Copyright © 2013, The Richmond Times-Dispatch and may not be republished without permission. E-mail library@timesdispatch.com

Load-Date: April 4, 2013


End of Document