Why America and Europe Clashed
The New York Times
May 7, 1986, Wednesday, Late City Final Edition


Copyright 1986 The New York Times Company
Section: Section A; Page 31, Column 1; Editorial Desk; Op-Ed
Length: 707 words
Byline: By Richard Burt; Richard Burt is the United States' Ambassador to West Germany.
Dateline: BONN
Body


The emotional debate over the raid against Libya, with Europeans accusing the United States of ''Rambomania,'' and Americans describing their friends here as ''Eurowimps,'' has shed very little light on why American and European public opinion diverged so sharply.
Was it, as many claim, inadequate consultation, a differing evaluation of the evidence or simply European indifference to terrorism? In fact, consultations were intense. Our allies had seen the evidence of Libya's complicity and found it compelling. And far from being complacent over terrorism, European governments devote immense resources to fighting it.
The explanation lies beyond this incident, indeed beyond the entire issue of terrorism. The Western alliance has succeeded in its principal task of defending Europe against invasion or coercion by the Soviet Union. Over the past 20 years, however, nearly every crisis in the third world has produced major trans-Atlantic strains: the Vietnam War, the 1973 Middle East conflict, the Iranian hostage crisis, the Soviet invasion of Afghanistan and now Libya.
In each case, the dominant American impulse was to do something about a situation that Washington was not prepared to accept. In contrast, the Europeans' dominant impulse was to insulate European interests from the consequences of events that they felt powerless to influence directly.
The key to these divergent responses is the differing perceptions of the United States and its allies about their respective capacities to exercise power. For the average American, the lesson of 20th century history has been that our country can wield substantial influence at great distances. Throughout the same period, European nations have seen their power steadily diminish and their overseas role dwindle. Peace on their own continent has had to be twice restored, and for 40 years sustained, with the vital assistance of the United States.
If Americans take their nation's capacity to project power at great distances for granted, Europeans almost certainly tend to underestimate their potential influence. Nevertheless, it is reasonable for the average West German, Frenchman, Spaniard or Italian to feel less able than the average American to meet more distant security challenges, such as state-sponsored terrorism. The disparity in power between the United States and any single European nation will thus continue to cause divergent responses to external threats. It will also continue to feed resentments on both sides of the Atlantic, with Americans asserting that Europeans are too docile and parochial and Europeans arguing that the United States is too eager to act unilaterally.
The pattern is familiar and perhaps even tolerable. But the strains and resentments may be cumulative and seem to be occurring with increasing frequency. It is possible, then, that at some point the Western alliance will be undermined in a fundamental and irreversible way. The answer seems clear: a more united and influential Western Europe. Only through greater unity can the Europeans create a greater but also well-founded sense of self-confidence. A strong and confident Europe would be able to meet, with the United States, common security challenges. A united Europe, of course, might not always agree with the United States, but at least Europe's basic impulse to action, when facing external challenges, would be more like the American impulse, because its capabilities would be more like those of the United States.
Over the past two weeks, even as several thousand Europeans marched through the streets to protest America's campaign against terrorism, European governments moved to close the most recent trans-Atlantic rift, to restore their credibility and to take tougher measures against Libya. It is important that the United States recognize and give further encouragement to these common European efforts. European unity is a distant goal, and the path leading there will be long and frustrating, for us and for the Europeans. But a more united Europe will not only be a more capable partner, it will also reduce the necessity for American unilateralism. Indeed, in the long run, a stronger and more united Europe may be indispensable to the preservation of the alliance.

Graphic

 
Drawing


End of Document