Why did police hold reporter's partner?
The Tampa Tribune (Florida)
August 20, 2013 Tuesday


Copyright 2013 Times Publishing Company All Rights Reserved
Section: NATION & WORLD; NationWorld; Pg. 7
Length: 355 words
Byline: The Washington Post
Dateline: LONDON  
Body


 A senior British politician said Monday he would seek clarification from London police on why anti-terrorism laws were used to detain the partner of a journalist who worked with National Security Agency leaker Edward Snowden.
Keith Vaz, chairman of Britain's Home Affairs Select Committee, said he was writing to police to establish exactly why David Miranda was detained for nine hours Sunday at London Heathrow Airport.
Miranda, 28, is the partner of Glenn Greenwald, the U.S. journalist who has written a series of stories for the Guardian newspaper about secret surveillance programs at the NSA and its British counterpart, the Government Communications Headquarters.
Miranda, who was en route to his Rio de Janeiro home, was held by British authorities under Schedule 7 of the Terrorism Act 2000 for nine hours, the maximum allowed before authorities have to release or formally arrest a person. The law allows authorities to question and detain individuals traveling through airports, ports and border areas.
According to the Guardian, Miranda had his laptop, cellphone, videogame consoles, DVDs and memory sticks confiscated.
Greenwald defiantly promised he was going to write much more aggressively than before about government snooping.
I'm going to publish many more things about England, as well, he said in Portuguese at Rio's airport when Miranda arrived. I have many documents about England's espionage system, and now my focus will be there, too. I think they'll regret what they've done.
In Washington, White House spokesman Josh Earnest said the U.S. government was tipped by British counterparts that Miranda would be detained, but the United States had not requested the action.  He didn't respond to a question about whether U.S. officials may have discouraged British officials from stopping Miranda.
The Brazilian government objected to Miranda's detention, saying it wasn't based on any real threat. 
Miranda told the Guardian on Monday that agents questioning him were threatening me all the time and saying I would be put in jail if I didn't cooperate.
Information from The Associated Press was used in this report. 

Load-Date: September 25, 2013


End of Document