Why not invite Gorbachev?
St. Petersburg Times (Florida)
July 18, 1989, Tuesday, City Edition


Times Publishing Company
Section: EDITORIAL; EDITORIALS; Pg. 8A; EDITORIAL
Length: 694 words
Body


As usual, the seven participants in the annual Western economic    summit came away from their meeting saying wonderful things about the    brilliance of their counterparts, the splendor of their accommodations    and the generally outstanding condition of the world of capitalism.
 
 From the perspective of Paris, whatever political or economic crises    they might have left at home appeared as little more than specks on a    distant horizon.
 
     No wonder Mikhail Gorbachev has expressed an eagerness to join    their club.
 
     If nothing else, full participation in the summits would provide    Gorbachev - as it does all the current participants - with a    prestigious forum that helps to divert everyone's attention from grubby    domestic details for a few days every year. Understandably, the group    of seven chose to offer Gorbachev cautious encouragement rather than    quick acceptance, but the idea of including the Soviet Union as a    full-fledged member of the group has more merit than might be    immediately apparent. As President Bush and other summit participants    noted, Gorbachev's overture at least is being taken seriously because    of political and economic reforms that already have taken place in the    Soviet Union and much of Eastern Europe.
    However, if the Soviet Union and other countries are invited to    participate, it will be because the current members have come to    realize that the nature of the summits has changed, too. The issues    that have come to dominate these annual meetings are more political    than purely economic, and many of them necessarily involve the Soviet    bloc. Furthermore, those emerging issues - the environment, terrorism,    East-West trade, Third World debt - tend to be global in scope.
 
     As an exercise in coordinated economic planning, the Paris summit    was even less effective than some of its predecessors. Japan and    Western Europe have become so weary of lecturing the United States on    the evils of our structural budget deficits that they hardly even    bothered to raise the issue last week. The summit participants agreed    in principle on a new formula for Third World debt relief, but they    reached no apparent consensus on a new trade policy with the Soviet    Union, Poland, Hungary and other Eastern European countries seeking    expanded relations.
 
     The issues that did win a special place on the negotiating table    cry out for the willing involvement of the Soviet bloc and the Third    World. Seven developed nations cannot singlehandedly address the    world's most serious environmental problems, but they can offer    economic incentives to Asian, African and South American governments    willing to alter their own destructive policies. International    anti-terrorism tactics can be effective only if the Soviet Union and    its allies are persuaded to play a constructive role in enforcing them.
 
     The group of seven need not wait for Gorbachev to transform the    Soviet Union into a model of capitalism and representative democracy    before inviting him to participate in their annual affairs. The Soviets    already have a legitimate interest in most of the non-economic issues    on the group's agenda. The current participants might even take    advantage of Gorbachev's eagerness by making further economic    cooperation contingent on the Soviets' good-faith involvement in issues    such as anti-terrorism and the environment.
 
     Aside from the Soviets' substantive interest in much of the group's    business, Gorbachev would be a dynamic addition to the summits' mix of    personalities. Major international disputes seldom have arisen as a    result of too much, as opposed to too little, communication. In the    context of these relentlessly convivial summits, even straightforward    affronts - such as Margaret Thatcher's ill-timed history lesson to    Francois Mitterrand - are met with subtle snubs rather than    declarations of war. The world will be a safer place when Thatcher can    go to Moscow, disparage the Bolshevik Revolution and suffer no more    severe retaliation than a bad seat at that night's banquet.
 

Load-Date: November 9, 1992


End of Document