Why Do We Still Play This Dirty Spy Game?;
Terrorism Studies
The New York Times
March 14, 1994, Monday, Late Edition - Final


Copyright 1994 The New York Times Company
Distribution: Editorial Desk 
Section: Section A; ; Section A;  Page 16;  Column 5;  Editorial Desk ; Column 5; ; Letter
Length: 407 words
Body


To the Editor:
Terrorism studies, a think-tank mainstay of the 1970's and 80's, are among the industries that have declined with the end of the cold war. For more than two decades, this was an academic growth industry, sucking huge sums from Federal agencies into such enterprises as the Rand Corporation, George Washington University and the Institute for Foreign Policy Analysis -- represented by Mark D. W. Edington in "Terror Made Easy" (Op-Ed, March 3).
Unfortunately, these studies taught us very little, or we were allowed to learn very little from them. The money filtered into them was from agencies whose own operations were usually sub rosa, so the resulting work was usually not publicly available. Such arrangements seriously compromise academic standards, like the free exchange of ideas and open access to data generated by public funds. Now the students of terrorism are suffering from cutbacks.
One thing we did learn during the period of terrorism studies was that these benefactors, the intelligence agencies, were unreliable in their main business: knowing what was going to happen, or probably going to happen, in key places. The collective wisdom of more than $1 trillion spent on intelligence gathering and analysis did not foresee or properly analyze the consequences of any significant event from the Tet offensive to the collapse of the Soviet Union -- let alone the hijacking of an airplane or the taking of hostages here and there.
Now the declining terrorism-studies industry warns us we face new dangers and must beef up our vigilance (and, by implication, our terrorism research budgets). They play off the domestic headlines and call for beefing up what we are just debeefing, and stricter controls on immigration and personal rights.
The facts do get in the way. The incidents Mr. Edington mentions (the World Trade Center bombing, the arrest of suspected Hamas supporters and the Brooklyn Bridge shooting) were solved with conventional policing powers and are being adjudicated through normal legal processes. We have enough knowledge and legal power to handle these things, and we should not be frightened or seduced into going back down the path of expensive and fruitless studies into what cannot be foreseen.
And we should be especially wary of anyone who wants more domestic controls over our movements and rights.
 
MICHAEL KAHAN
Assoc. Professor, Political Science
Brooklyn College, CUNY
Staten Island, March 3, 1994

Load-Date: March 14, 1994


End of Document