Why I Wrote That Palestinian Terror Is Justified
The Forward
September 16, 2011


Copyright 2011 The Forward Association, Incorporated All Rights Reserved
Section: Forward Forum; Pg. 7
Length: 1148 words
Body


The blog post was a disaster  in every possible way. It  outraged and offended many.
The writer, a former columnist at the Jerusalem  Post, was fired from his job on August 29 for a blog  post entitled The awful, necessary truth about  Palestinian terror, which he published on his  personal website, Israel Reconsidered. Visit our  Forward Thinking blog to read excerpts from the  blog post that got Derfner fired.
Why did I do it? Why did I write that the  occupation justifies Palestinian terror,  even the recent killing of eight Israelis  near Eilat? It wasn't inevitable, but I suppose it  wasn't exactly accidental, either.
In my thinking about politics, I'm always going  back and forth between my principles of justice  and my allegiance to Israel, trying to see how they  can be reconciled. For the last few years, my most  urgent political message has been that the occupation  oppresses Palestinians, and that oppressed  people who cannot get their freedom peacefully  can be expected to try by violent means, so for  the sake of justice and peace on both sides, Israel  should get rid of the occupation.
In my Jerusalem Post columns, I tried to put  this point across by asking readers: If anybody  did to us what we do to the Palestinians, what  would we do? What did we do, or at least what did  Menachem Begin's Irgun and Yitzhak Shamir's  Lehi undergrounds do, when the Jews in Palestine  were under British rule?
My point is not that Palestinians should use  terror to fight the occupation, it's that Israelis  should end the occupation. They should see that  it's unjust to the Palestinians and consequently  a threat to us.
This upsets a lot of readers, of course, and I  was called a lot of bad names in the comments  section, but the attacks would generally roll off  my back because I felt I could defend my argument  to anyone.
As an opinion writer, I want to provoke thought,  to take arguments as far as they'll go, to break  new ground on every outing. I also have a secondary,  political goal, even though I know it's  fanciful to think I can advance it by writing  to  change Israel, mainly by ending the occupation.  Lots of Israeli opinion writers share that political  goal, and we are a very frustrated bunch.
When the eight Israelis were killed near Eilat,  I was in Sweden on vacation with my family. I  came back a couple of days lafter and wanted to  write a strong blog post. I have a lot of thoughts  about the use of terrorism in a good cause   Palestinian independence, Jewish independence,  anti-colonialism, anti-apartheid  but I always  told myself not to treat this subject in a column  because I wouldn't have the space to fully explain  myself, to put in all the caveats, to make a point  that covered all the pros and cons and conditions  in the right proportions. If I tried to write about  something so big and so raw as terrorism in the  abbreviated, narrow way a column demands, a lot  of people could get the wrong idea, and in Israel  that could be a real problem.
God, I wish I hadn't forgotten that resolution.  When I came back from vacation after the Eilat  attack, the strongest blog post I thought I could  write was to challenge the taboo against suggesting  that Israel bore any responsibility at all for  Palestinian terrorism.
But how could I make my point in a way I hadn't  before? What could I write that would be new  and thought provoking? I was sitting in my workroom  at home. I didn't want to spend too long on  it. And I jumped right into the post by taking an  extremely large, easily-misunderstood idea  that  the stifling of freedom breeds rebellion, which I  believe  and expressed it in a way that was so  crude that it conveyed something I don't believe
at all. It took me a few days to realize, but what I  wrote in that August 21 blog, The awful, necessary  truth about Palestinian terror, grossly oversimplifi ed what I think of Palestinian terror in a  way that was, as some critics said, obscene.  It also stood in head-on opposition to my allegiance  to Israel.
The words justified and right, as in having a  right to do something, are laudatives, the opposite  of pejoratives  they carry a positive connotation.  When you write that Palestinians are justified or  have a right to use terror against Israelis, the implication  is that terror against Israelis is a good thing.
That is the last thing on earth that I believe. And  I tried to make this point later in the blog post:  But while I think the Palestinians have the right  to use terrorism against us, I don't want them to  use it, I don't want to see Israelis killed, and as  an Israeli, I would do whatever was necessary to  stop a Palestinian, oppressed or not, from killing  one of my countrymen.
I tried to balance one principle with another, but  the problem is that they don't balance. They contradict  each other. When an Israeli says Palestinian  terror is justified, and then says he's against it, it  doesn't make sense. And when I led off the essay  by justifying the killing of Israelis, even if I made  it clear that my purpose was to end that killing,  and wound up the piece by saying the attackers  in Eilat were also justified, then all my assurances  of not wanting to see Israelis hurt by terror and  being prepared to do anything to stop it, along  with my assertion that I did not want to give aid  and comfort to Israel's enemies  while all true,  became hopelessly obscured. What's left in the  minds of people who don't know my previous  work, or who hate my previous work, is that I  justified terror against Israelis.
I know, and many, many other people know,  that I didn't mean to do such a thing. But I did.
The blog post was a disaster in every possible  way. It deeply offended and outraged many  people. The apology I published on August 26,  however, softened many people's feelings, convinced  them that I'd at least meant well. To my  own reading and that of many other readers, my  decent intentions were apparent in the original  post. But in Israel and the Diaspora, this view has  been drowned out in the uproar.
I've read that some of my fellow leftists think this  affair may actually help make it easier to talk with  Israelis about the connection between the occupation  and terror. Maybe. I don't know. I've been  talking to Israelis about that connection for many  years, and what this affair teaches me is how not  to do it. I've been taking the argument further and  further and further, and now I've crashed into the  wall. I don't think my opinions have changed,  but I have to find new ways to articulate them,  ways that reconcile my principles of justice with  my allegiance to Israel, instead of sacrificing one  or both out of recklessness.
I have some thinking to do. Meanwhile, another  thing I've learned is that when you're a provocative,  left-leaning blogger in Israel, an editor  just might come in handy.

Load-Date: September 18, 2011


End of Document