Why terrorism threatens our way of life
University Wire
October 14, 1998


Copyright 1998 The Pitt News via U-Wire
Length: 787 words
Byline: By Michael Berquist, The Pitt News
Dateline: Pittsburgh, Penn.
Body


In the last five years, America has seen the worst incidence of terrorism in its history. We have seen a wave of bombings that included an attempt by Islamic extremists to destroy the World Trade Center in 1993, an explosion at the 1996 Olympic Games, and the recent bombings of two U.S Embassies by Islamic extremists.
In the western half of the United States, there have been several standoffs between federal agents and disgruntled Americans driven by hatred of their government to take up arms. What is particularly worrisome is that the worst may be yet to come.
U. Pittsburgh
The emerging information age provides America with the possibility of tremendous economic growth and prosperity, but it also leaves us precariously vulnerable. To find information on how to build bombs and manufacture weapons, one needs only to go onto the Internet and download information from the multitude of sites devoted to terrorism.
Our reliance on computers for simple day-to-day activities such as grocery shopping and banking makes sabotage an inviting proposition to cyberterrorists seeking to cause damage as either a way to advance a political agenda or simply to have fun. To combat this threat, some officials in government have called for a Manhattan Project-style effort from the government to develop a system to safeguard America's transportation, banking and communications infrastructure against attack from the Internet.
Imagine someone slipping a computer bug into an airport computer, disrupting the pilot's ability to deal with air traffic on a busy holiday like Thanksgiving. The Pandemonium the person would be able unleash is unimaginable. Deputy Attorney General Jamie S. Gorelick commented in an interview, "We will have the cyber equivalent of Pearl Harbor at some point, and we don't want to wait for this to happen." Our vulnerability to cyberattack may pose an even greater threat to America than the much-discussed year 2000 computer bug.
As alarming as the availability of information and the proliferation of the ways to commit crimes are, what is perhaps even more disturbing is how unprepared the United States is to combat biological terrorism. Former Sen. Sam Nunn noted in 1996 that while the United States spends roughly $ 261 billion dollars each year protecting itself from foreign armies, no one is entirely sure how much money we devote each year to protecting ourselves from terrorists who refuse to meet our soldiers on the battlefield.
"It's buried in all parts of the budget. Every agency's got a part of it, and nobody is really in charge," said Nunn. The federal government is so unprepared to deal with terrorism that the spokesman of the Federal Emergency Management Agency (FEMA) admitted that if another Oklahoma City-type incident takes place in the future, "we are probably going to hear about it on CNN."
The United States needs to launch a concerted, long-term, effort to combat terrorism. One former U.S. diplomat noted: "Every time there is a major terrorist incident, American politicians are always standing with clenched jaws saying we're serious now. Their attention span always lasts a few months. Congress has second thoughts about the budget. And everything goes slack again."
The president probably ought to create a federal agency dedicated to combating terrorist activities as a way to focus U.S. energy. We simply cannot put our heads in the sand and pretend that this problem will go away. The head of the FBI's terrorism division, when asked about the possibility of an attack on American citizens by chemical or biological weapons, said, "The consensus of people in law enforcement is that it's not a matter of if it's going to happen, it's when."
There is opposition, some justified and some not, that increased anti-terrorism measures will lead to restrictions in American civil liberties. The National Rifle Association, for example, has spent 16 years opposing such anti-terrorism measures as taggants, microscopic plastic chips that can be added to explosive materials so law enforcement officers can track down the perpetrators of a bombing. Personally, I fail to understand the NRA's bizarre logic. Why on earth would anyone want to defend criminals and terrorists bent on killing innocent people?
We live in dangerous and disturbing. To protect our safety, we must take certain precautions in the future. Building anti-terrorist protocols into our computer systems is a good place to start, as would be having the government more clearly define how anti-terrorism funds are to be used. We would all be the better for it.
Michael Berquist doubts he'll be getting any Christmas cards from Charlton Heston this year.
(C) 1999 The Pitt News via U-WIRE

Load-Date: February 8, 1999


End of Document