WHY THEY USE TERROR
Pittsburgh Post-Gazette
October 2, 2016 Sunday
TWO STAR EDITION


Copyright 2016 P.G. Publishing Co.
Section: EDITORIAL; LETTERS TO THE EDITOR; Pg. D-2
Length: 300 words
Byline: JOHN H. EISENMAN, Oakmont
Body


As I read the Sept. 11 front-page article"Americans Safer, But Terror Grows," I could not help but wonder how wrong we might be in our attempt to combat terrorism.
We Americans value our sovereignty above all else. The vast majority of our citizens would deeply resent any effort by a foreign nation to force their system of government upon us. With our military superiority, we need not worry about foreign domination- even if our political system is corrupt and nonresponsive.
History records that more than 200 years ago, we had a tea party and fought a revolution to end domination, even though the dominating country was our Mother Country, which believed it was acting on our behalf.
How, then, can we expect the Muslim nations of the Near East to willingly accept our militarily enforced domination without resistance? They know they cannot match our military might on the battlefield; so what alternative is available to those who choose to resist? Terrorism is the most obvious answer, even though it is engaged in by only a segment of their population. It is effective, destructive and embarrassing to us.
Unfortunately, the charisma generated by our vast military superiority has a greater influence on many of our political leaders and their supporters than the expediency of getting things done. I wonder if it ever occurred to them that we might diminish terrorism more effectively by returning to the policies of the Truman and Eisenhower administrations, when we led by generosity and example rather than by military domination. Both Germany and Japan willingly adopted our form of government and continue to be responsible world leaders in harmony with us.
We need to understand that negotiated settlements require give and take from both sides and domination will always ferment resistance.

Load-Date: October 4, 2016


End of Document