WIDENING WAR • Britain fights to stay on top of large number of terrorism cases FOUND GUILTY The four Muslim men who faced verdicts Thursday are some of more than 100 involved in terrorism cases in Britain.
St. Louis Post-Dispatch (Missouri)
July 6, 2007 Friday
FIRST EDITION


Copyright 2007 St. Louis Post-Dispatch, Inc. All Rights Reserved
Section: NEWS; Pg. A1
Length: 698 words
Byline: By Sarah Lyall New York Times The Associated Press contributed to this report.
Dateline: LONDON 
Body


Britain is awash in terrorism trials, with some accused of plans to attack the United States. More than 100 people have recently been convicted, or are currently on trial, awaiting trial or facing verdicts in more than two dozen terrorism-related cases here.
Four Muslim men were convicted of terrorist offenses in two separate trials in Britain on Thursday.
In one case, three men in London - one British-born, the others from overseas - were convicted of inciting terrorist murder through extremist websites they operated on the Internet, the first conviction of its kind in Britain.
The sites included videos of beheadings by insurgents in Iraq, bomb-making instructions and exhortations to commit terrorist acts in the name of Islam.
U.S. law enforcement officials have said the Capitol building was featured in short video clips.
During their trial, prosecutors also detailed the message traffic on Internet forums run by the men.
One message read: "We are 45 doctors and we are determined to undertake jihad and take the battle inside America."
The Mayport Naval Base in Jacksonville, Fla., home of the now-retired carrier John F. Kennedy, was named as a potential target in another. That message also referred to using six Chevrolet GT vehicles and three fishing boats and blowing up gasoline tanks with rocket-propelled grenades.
In the second case, 37-year-old Omar Altimimi, who came to Britain from the Netherlands in 2002, was convicted in Manchester of possessing what the prosecution described as a "vast library" of material that included information on how to make explosives, how to detonate bombs remotely and how to set up terrorist cells in Britain.
In the wake of last week's incidents in London and Glasgow, the investigation into the foiled car-bomb plots has dominated media coverage, all but drowning out the news of the latest verdicts. In part that is because terrorism trials have become almost commonplace.
Seven men were sentenced to prison terms ranging from 15 to 26 years last month for their roles as accomplices to an al-Qaida terrorist planning attacks on targets in Britain and the United States, including the New York Stock Exchange and the headquarters of the International Monetary Fund and the World Bank.
And in April, five men were found guilty of planning fertilizer-bomb attacks on targets around London, including a major suburban shopping center and a popular London nightclub.
A verdict is expected soon in one of the biggest cases: that of six men accused of the botched suicide bombing attempts on London's subways and buses on July 21, 2005. The failed attacks - in which the bombs did not explode - took place exactly two weeks after the July 7 attacks that killed 56 people, including four of the perpetrators.
The sheer number of cases shows how difficult it is for the authorities to keep on top of the activities of would-be terrorists in this country.
While many of the suspects appear to be motivated by the same ideology - hatred of the West and support for violent jihad directed at targets symbolizing what they regard as Western power or decadence - the individual plots are hard to unravel. Relationships are complicated. Suspects work together or individually, with other Britons or people from abroad, often connected by evidence on computers or cell phones that requires painstaking investigation before charges can be brought.
The Manchester case came about because Altimimi was arrested last year on suspicion of money laundering. When the police seized his computer, they found files containing instructions on making bombs, detonators and explosives, and video clips of graphic executions of hostages in Iraq.
The three men convicted in London on Thursday came to the attention of the police after a man arrested near Sarajevo, Bosnia, in 2005 was found in possession of a video that showed the three apparently preparing for an attack.
It is illegal in Britain to operate websites inciting terrorism, and the three men - 23-year-old Younis Tsouli, originally from Morocco; 24-year-old Waseem Mughal, who was born in Britain; and 21-year-old Tariq al-Daour, originally from the United Arab Emirates - were found guilty of doing just that.

Graphic

 
PHOTO
 PHOTO - Altimimi  PHOTO - Tsouli  PHOTO - Al-Daour  PHOTO - Mughal 

Load-Date: July 6, 2007


End of Document