Widening the Lens On Two Murdered Israelis
The Forward
October 4, 2013


Copyright 2013 The Forward Association, Incorporated All Rights Reserved
Section: Letters; Pg. 8
Length: 1181 words
Byline: 
Contact J. J. Goldberg at
Body


A relative island of  tranquility in a sea of  meltdown.
He was a diminutive man, though solidly  built. I saw him standing near the  bar, nursing a mineral water while the  gaggle of Americans and Palestinians, politicians,  Jewish peace activists, journalists  and rabbis mingled and gossiped, waiting  for dinner and Mahmoud Abbas's remarks.  I wouldn't have pegged him as security if  not for his green enamel lapel pin. On this  Monday at the Plaza Hotel, I deduced, green  enamel meant Palestinian.
Palestinian security? I asked. Yes, he  replied, grinning, chin thrust forward, adding
a good inch and a half to  his height.
Are you with the president's  guard? I asked.
Foreign ministry, he  said.
I'm curious, I said.  Can you tell me anything  about the killings of the  Israeli soldiers over the  weekend?
It's very bad, he said,  turning serious. We are very concerned for  Israeli security. Without security for Israelis  there can't be a peace process. This is very  important to us.
I don't hear much optimism about peace  these days, I said.
I am optimistic, he said. I believe  President Abbas is optimistic. People want  peace. Palestinians want our own state. Of  course, if there is no progress, the people will  look to Hamas. Then there will be no state,  no security, no peace. We must be optimistic.  But his eyes showed fear.
The murders of the two soldiers, Tomer  Hazan and Gal Kobi, both 20, help illustrate  his point in a ghoulish sort of way. Kobi  had been shot by a sniper the day before,  September 22, while standing guard in  Hebron, south of Jerusalem. Hazan was murdered  September 20 by a Palestinian acquaintance  who dumped his body in a well near  Qalqilya, 50 miles further north. Both funerals  drew thousands of angry mourners.
Politicians on the right claimed the deaths  proved the peace process is a sham. Thirtyfi ve lawmakers, including seven Cabinet ministers,  signed letters demanding that Prime  Minister Benjamin Netanyahu reconsider  an upcoming Palestinian prisoner release, part  of the deal that restarted peace talks.
Twenty years after Oslo, the Palestinians  have yet to abandon the path of terror,  Deputy Defense Minister (and freshly-minted  New York Times contributor) Danny Danon  said in a radio interview.
From Gaza, Hamas deputy chief Moussa  Abu Marzouk channeled Danon, writing on  his Facebook page that Palestinians in the  West Bank planned more killings and were  on the verge of a third intifada.
It seemed awkward, yet necessary, to point  out that the soldiers were only the second  and third Israeli deaths from terrorism in all  of 2013. These were two tragic events that  occurred in the same time period, but we do  not see them as part of a new trend, Israel's  military chief of staff, Benny Gantz, told a  Sukkot holiday gathering.
Every death is an entire world, center-right  columnist Ben-Dror Yemini wrote in the daily  Maariv, paraphrasing a rabbinic maxim.  But has the intifada resumed? Not exactly.  The number of casualties from acts of violence,  Israelis and Palestinians, shows a substantial  decrease in recent years.
He continued: With all the sorrow over the  last two events, they are still isolated cases.  We should pay attention to the global battle  against Islamist terrorism, of which Israel  is a part.
Yemini went on to catalog the grisly toll from  terrorist attacks around the world in the preceding  week alone: Nigeria, 140 civilians murdered  in the mostly Christian north by the  Al Qaeda-linked Boko Haram. Pakistan, 85  Christians slaughtered when a church was  bombed by a Taliban offshoot. Kenya, 72  shoppers murdered in an assault on a shopping  mall, apparently by Somali terrorists  from the Al Qaeda-linked Al Shabab.
There was more: Iraq, 96 Shi'ites killed  nationwide in a single day of bombings and  shootings, September 21. The Philippines,  dozens killed, more kidnapped, final toll
unknown, in armed attacks on two separate  southern villages by competing Islamist rebel  groups. All told, perhaps 500 killed around the  world. Hundreds more injured and maimed.  In just one week. And, yes, every death is  someone's entire world lost forever.
Where does Israel fit in all this? In a way, it's  an island of tranquility amid a region in meltdown.  This doesn't quite fit the narrative of a  nation beset by unrelenting terror. Facts can  be awkward things.
The three deaths from West Bank terrorism  in 2013 follow a year, 2012, in which nine  Israelis were killed, all in attacks originating  from Gaza or Sinai, none from the West Bank.
Those numbers need qualification. While  there were no fatal attacks on the West  Bank in 2012, the Israel Defense Forces web-site  shows numerous non-fatal attacks: 15  shootings, 642 firebombings and 4,731 rock-throwing  incidents. Many more attacks were  thwarted.
But these numbers are a fraction of what  Israel suffered during serious terror waves,  including the First Intifada from 1988 to 1993  and the blood-soaked Second Intifada from  2000 to 2005. The reason, as Israeli security  officials repeatedly tell a disbelieving Knesset,  is some seven years of successful Israeli-Palestinian security cooperation.
This fact is uncomfortable for the Israeli  right, which works hard to keep the memory  of the terror years fresh. If Palestinians are  shown to be a band of irredeemable terrorists,  then Israel can't grant them independence   and thus must keep control of the biblical  heartland in Judea and Samaria.
One result of this dissonance is the periodic  dark comedy of military and Shin Bet leaders  testifying in Knesset that terrorism is down  because of Israeli-Palestinian cooperation and  being told by angry lawmakers that, no, it is  all thanks to you military and Shin Bet guys.
What's the difference who's responsible?  According to current Shin Bet director  Yoram Cohen, addressing Israeli diplomats in  Jerusalem last January, Abbas is very much in  command of his security apparatus. His goal  is a peace agreement with Israel. But he needs  to show progress, so his security efforts don't  brand him as a collaborator. Warnings have  been sounded for years that if Palestinian statehood  isn't on the horizon, cooperation will  break down. And then all hell will break loose.
But Netanyahu does the opposite.  Settlements keep growing, squeezing the  land available for a Palestinian state. Last  November, in retaliation for Abbas's U. N.  statehood bid, he froze the transfer of tax revenues  that Israel collects for the Palestinians.  Salaries weren't paid. Abbas's security forces  couldn't pay their grocery bills. Following  the latest killings, Bibi ordered the opening  of a hotly disputed Hebron building to settler  occupancy.
Abbas feels the heat, as he made clear that  Monday at the Plaza. Some people have lost  their hope of a two-state solution because they  see settlements everywhere, he said. They  criticize me for negotiating with the Israelis.  But I gave my word.
I am not doing Israel a favor, Abbas said.  I am doing it for my own people. If I did not  have hope, you would not see me here.

Graphic

 
IMAGE

Load-Date: October 7, 2013


End of Document