WIDOW URGES WORLD FIGHT ON TERROR
The New York Times
October 31, 1985, Thursday, Late City Final Edition


Copyright 1985 The New York Times Company
Section: Section B; Page 8, Column 4; Foreign Desk
Length: 521 words
Byline: By ROBIN TONER, Special to the New York Times
Dateline: WASHINGTON, Oct. 30
Body


Marilyn Klinghoffer, whose husband was slain in the hijacking of the Achille Lauro cruise ship, delivered an impassioned plea here today for a worldwide commitment to combat terrorism, which she called ''the gravest danger confronting the civilized world.''
''I believe that my husband's death has made a difference in the way that people now perceive their vulnerability,'' Mrs. Klinghoffer told the House Foreign Affairs Subcommittee on International Operations. ''I believe that what happened to the passengers on the Achille Lauro, and to my family, can happen to anyone, at any time, at any place.''
Mrs. Klinghoffer, 58 years old, urged approval of a resolution introduced by Representative Ted Weiss, a Democrat who represents the 17th Congressional District of New York, in which she lives. That resolution condemns the hijacking of the Italian liner on Oct. 7 ''and the cowardly and brutal'' killing of Leon Klinghoffer, 69, who used a wheelchair.
It also urges President Reagan to call an international meeting ''to determine the steps which must be taken to rid the world once and for all of hijacking and the taking of hostages.''
 
'Lament of the Martyrs'
Mrs. Klinghoffer's brief statement did not delve into the details of her ordeal, but rather focused broadly on the issue of terrorism. In her closing comments, she said, ''As its latest victim, I bring to you also the lament of the martyrs and the survivors that have gone before,'' listing modern terrorist attacks.
Jay Fischer, her lawyer, said Mrs. Klinghoffer wanted to refrain from detailed testimony on the Achille Lauro hijacking and the security measures aboard the Italian ship because of criminal proceedings pending against the hijacking suspects in Italy and the possibility of other legal actions.
After her testimony, when asked about her plans, Mrs. Klinghoffer told reporters that she hoped ''to go back to my private life.'' She added: ''I've been saying that. So far, I haven't gotten to it, but I will, I hope.''
The House subcommittee heard Mrs. Klinghoffer's testimony as part of a continuing review of terrorism and antiterrorism activities. The panel also heard today from Robert B. Oakley, director of the State Department's office for counterterrorism and emergency planning.
 
Speedier Action Urged
Mr. Oakley said the hijacking of the Achille Lauro had ''strengthened our resolve and determination to continue the fight against the scourge of international terrorism.''
But Representative Daniel A. Mica, Democrat of Florida and chairman of the subcommittee, said he was disappointed at the pace of some antiterrorism initiatives.
In other action today stemming from the Achille Lauro hijacking, the chairman of the Senate Judiciary Committee said he would introduce legislation to permit the death penalty for terrorists who kill American hostages overseas. The chairman, Senator Strom Thurmond of South Carolina, said the legislation was a ''direct response'' to the slaying of Mr. Klinghoffer.
The legislation will be introduced in the form of an amendment to a death penalty bill that Senator Thurmond, a Republican, is sponsoring in Congress.


End of Document