Wiesenthal Center targets online terror training
USA TODAY
May 8, 2013 Wednesday
FINAL EDITION


Copyright 2013 Gannett Company, Inc. All Rights Reserved
Section: NEWS; Pg. 3A
Length: 309 words
Byline: Elizabeth Weise, USA TODAY,
Body


The Internet has become a vast terrorism tutorial for would-be jihadists, and social networking sites should create a zero-tolerance policy for online terrorism and hate groups, a  top human rights organization says.
A pro-terrorism subculture is increasingly easy to find online, says Rabbi Abraham Cooper, of the Simon Wiesenthal Center in Los Angeles. The center works to end anti-Semitism, hate groups and terrorism. He says overseas terrorist groups now tell potential recruits: "You don't have to train here. You can just download the instructions and take action right where you are."
Cooper will present the center's 2013 Digital Terrorism and Hate report at a briefing  today on Capitol Hill. The briefing is being held by Reps. Eliot Engel,   the ranking Democrat on the House Foreign Affairs Committee, and Ed Royce, a California Republican who chairs the committee.
The kind of information available online changes  rapidly, Cooper says. "Three years ago, it was almost all in Arabic," he says. "Now it's in English and multiple other languages."
"I don't think there's any question that terrorist instructional materials are more available online than they used to be," says Mark Potok, senior fellow at the Southern Poverty Law Center, which monitors domestic hate groups. "The Boston bombers are the classic example of that. They got the pressure-cooker bomb instructions online."
The Wiesenthal report assigns letter grades to online companies based on how they deal with hate and terror material. Facebook got an A-minus because of its effort to eliminate digital prejudice and hate on the site. YouTube was graded C-minus because of the number of how-to terror videos on the site.
"There's still just way too much how-to info on YouTube. There's no reason for it. It technically violates their rules, but they don't look into it," Cooper says. 

Load-Date: May 8, 2013


End of Document