WIESEL, AT CAPITOL CEREMONY, LINKS TERRORISM TO HOLOCAUST
The New York Times
May 7, 1986, Wednesday, Late City Final Edition


Copyright 1986 The New York Times Company
Section: Section A; Page 24, Column 3; National Desk
Length: 666 words
Byline: Special to the New York Times
Dateline: WASHINGTON, May 6
Body


Speaking today at a ceremony at the Capitol Rotunda to memorialize those killed in the Nazi Holocaust, the author Elie Wiesel suggested that acts of terrorism at the present time ''may well be a consequence of what happened then.''
''At first, Jews alone were the terrorists' targets,'' said Mr. Wiesel, who is chairman of the United States Holocaust Memorial Council. ''Now everyone is. Terrorism has become state-sponsored, state-financed and state-planned. It must be denounced as an onslaught against humanity.''
''What is happening today may very well be a consequence of what happened then,'' he said. ''All events are interrelated.''
 
He Refers to Waldheim Race
Referring to former the United Nations Secretary General Kurt Waldheim, Mr. Wiesel said: ''The former highest official of the United Nations, who is now running for President of Austria, finds refuge in oblivion. What is this, if not political cynicism on the highest level? Has the world learned nothing from its recent past?''
Mr. Waldheim faces a runoff election next month, having received 49.6 percent of the votes in Sunday's voting in in Austria after a campaign dominated by controversy over his record in World War II. The World Jewish Congress and other groups have accused Mr. Waldheim of lying about his service with the German Army in Greece and the Balkans. Mr. Waldheim has said he was ''a decent soldier'' who only performed his duty.
At the ceremony, part of the council's national Days of Remembrance, Mr. Wiesel made a symbolic presentation of the first Eisenhower Liberation Medal to the American soldiers who liberated the German Nazi concentration camps in 1945. The medal was named for General of the Army Dwight D. Eisenhower, who was the supreme allied commander in Europe for most of the war. The award is to be presented annually for contributions to human rights, Bush Addresses Gathering Vice President Bush told the gathering: ''The youngest of the liberators is in his 60's now. Our challenge today is to insist that time will not become the Nazis' friend, that time will not lead us to make the Holocaust into an abstraction.''
At a news conference this morning, members of the United States Romani Union, which represents gypsies in this country, demanded recognition by the Holocaust council, which Congress set up in 1980 to conduct annual ceremonies to memoralize the six million Jews and millions of others killed by the Nazis. None of the 65 council members are gypsies, or Romani, as they prefer to be called.
Barry A. Fisher, a lawyer with the group, said, ''At least a half million gypsies were murdered in the Holocaust.''
At the ceremony this afternoon, the council announced that the gypsy victims of the Holocaust would be memorialized in a ceremony in September to mark the slaughter in 1944 by the SS, a special police unit of the Nazi Party, of a large number of gypsies camped near Auschwitz.
 
Memorial in New York
Jewish, Roman Catholic and Greek Orthodox leaders gathered in a Manhattan plaza yesterday to remember the Jews killed in the Holocaust.
''They lie at rest in nameless graves,'' Ronald B. Sobel, senior rabbi of Temple Emanu-El, told the audience. ''Their resting places in far-off forests and lonely places are lost. And yet, they shall not be forgotten.''
The ceremony, a commemoration of Yom Hashoah, the Day of Holocaust Remembrance, began at 11 A.M. in front of the Holocaust Memorial Wall at Dag Hammarskjold Plaza, on 47th Street near First Avenue.
John Cardinal O'Connor, the Roman Catholic Archbishop of New York, called a visit to the concentration camp museum at Dachau ''the most dramatic impact made in my life.'' He said the suffering of the Holocaust was ''infinitely too precious'' to be forgotten.
Metropolitan Silas, leader of the Greek Orthodox Diocese of New Jersey, recalled the closeness of the Greeks and the Jews when he was a student before World War II and said that the Nazis had to a great extent destroyed Jewish communities that dated to Hellenic times.


End of Document