WikiLeaks founder blurs partriotism and terrorism
The Circle: Marist College
October 3, 2013 Thursday


University Wire
Copyright 2013 UWIRE via U-Wire All Rights Reserved
Section: 570; Pg. 1
Length: 821 words
Byline: Sean P. Fallon
Body


WikiLeaks founder blurs partriotism and terrorism
By Sean P. FallonOn October 3, 2013TweetPin It Whether you love him, hate him or have no idea who he is, Julian Assange has gone from a small time computer hacker and magazine writer, to one of the most influential figures on the face of the Earth in a matter of a few decades.
For the uninitiated, Julian Assange is the editor-in-chief of WikiLeaks, a website that is dedicated to the release of classified information to the public. According to statements on the website, "Our work is based on the defense of freedom of speech and media publishing, the improvement of our common historical record and the support of the rights of all people to create new history." All of these goals, I might add, are in line with the Universal Declaration of Human Rights, a document passed by the United Nations as a guideline for the world to act in regards to the rights of its people.
Assange has a rather interesting background. He is an Australian native who attended thirty-seven different schools as a child. During his youth he spent much of his time as a hacker and computer hobbyist, who, as early as 1991, was the target of hacking charges after he accessed the computers of an Australian telecom company. In 2007, he founded WikiLeaks, the site that has garnered him a polarizing reputation for releasing classified documents against the will of the nations from which they were collected for the public to see.
WikiLeaks has been credited with many broad-reaching achievements, such as changing the direction of elections in Kenya, helping shift public opinion on the United States' War on Terror and publishing war crimes and human rights violations on over half of the nations of the world.
In the span of three short years , WikiLeaks published more classified documents than all of the world's new organizations combined, a record which stands in the millions and continues to grow.
The site operates as a nonprofit, entirely volunteer organization that sustains itself, its servers and its encryption methods almost entirely off of public donation. Most of the funding comes from external sources, as does much of the information that the site has published. "Whistle-blowers," as the news media likes to call them, come to WikiLeaks with the information they have uncovered and give it to the site through encrypted and secretive ways that range from Internet transfers, to encrypted messages in postal mail.
What does WikiLeaks actually do? For starters, they provide a location for, and a means by which informants might leak classified documents anonymously, through various methods of encryption and a dedicated server for the information. The WikiLeaks staff also edits the documents they release, tending to redact or restrict names for the anonymity of their informants, to reduce the personal damages that the documents might afflict on individual people and to take some names and hold them for political leverage over the world powers.
Of course, illegally publishing the documents of world powers doesn't occur without repercussions. China, along with several other nations, have barred WikiLeaks from public access over the internet (which WikiLeaks continues to subvert with encrypted URL codes and other methods).
I believe all of us in the United States have at least heard of Bradley Manning or Edward Snowden, two "whistle-blowers" that respectively have been, or are currently being, charged by the U.S. government for leaking confidential documents to WikiLeaks and other media sources. While the effort to apprehend Snowden and bring him to court still continues, Manning has already been tried, and was convicted on Aug. 21 to 35 years in prison and a dishonorable discharge.
The media has had a split depiction of Assange's actions since the inception of his now infamous website. On the one hand, many paint Assange as a criminal, whose actions against the world's governments are threatening the security of intelligence, especially in the War on Terror. Many, including President Obama, have noted that the publication on many documents of the War on Terror could offer terrorists a greater insight into American and Allied operations in the Middle East.
On the other hand, many praise Assange's actions as heroic. From making transparent the war crime of foreign dictators, to illustrating civilian murders in the War on Terror, many people hold Assange as a standard by which the media should operate: to clarify the truth in any and all situations.
Despite his crimes, many flock to Assange's cause, which, in part, has allowed WikiLeaks to stay functional and has inspired many to act similarly and even contribute to the WikiLeaks mantra of transparency.
As for my thoughts on Assange, I don't like him as a man, but I agree with what he and his site stand for. His initiatives to better inform the public are a goal for which every reporter should strive.

Load-Date: October 28, 2015


End of Document