WILL TERROR PRECAUTIONS IMPAIR LIBERTY IN THE NAME OF LIBERTY?
Pittsburgh Post-Gazette (Pennsylvania)
January 24, 1999, Sunday,
TWO STAR EDITION


Copyright 1999 P.G. Publishing Co.
Section: NATIONAL,
Length: 849 words
Byline: ANN MCFEATTERS, SCRIPPS HOWARD NEWS SERVICE
Dateline: WASHINGTON
Body


President Clinton's alarming statements last week that he is convinced the United States will experience a major terrorist attack from nerve gas, germs or a debilitating computer virus have been a long time in coming.
Eager to stress good times and loath to be too alarmist, Clinton has talked in general about terrorism but until now has not been specific.
Now, he says, he wants to spend $ 2.8 billion on a domestic defense center to coordinate responses to terrorist plots because it is "highly likely" Americans will face biological or chemical attacks "in a few years."
But there are some who think Clinton is taking the wrong approach without enough debate. And some say the administration has not taken the threat seriously enough.
The American Civil Liberties Union is worried about the idea of a new national commander for domestic defense with undefined power. Businesses are worried they will lose competitive advantage if the government gets too involved in computer security. Conservatives are worried about new efforts to cooperate with Russia and exchange sensitive information about security threats, fearing it could leak to America's enemies.
After the Oklahoma City bombing - by Americans - Clinton tried to push through such changes as keeping closer tabs on domestic radicals through wiretaps, fertilizer sales and percussion caps. He was soundly criticized by civil libertari ans who said that most of the proposals were too restrictive for a democracy.
Now Clinton is said to be considering a proposal to identify every individual and all freight entering the country.
One step that has been saluted is Clinton's decision to merge various departments of government into the national security team. For example, Health and Human Services Secretary Donna Shalala is included because of the computer threats to the Social Security system and the importance of the Centers for Disease Control. The Energy Department is also included.
Last May, Clinton also established the new post of national coordinator for security infrastructure protection and counter-terrorism, now held by Richard Clarke. But the history of the influence of czars, such as the drug czar, is not strong.
Dr. Joshua Lederberg, a geneticist and president emeritus of the University of Rockefeller, said at a terrorism conference at the National Academy of Sciences Friday that Clinton for years had feared "the great advances of medicine would be turned into engines of war."
Lederberg said he was glad that at last "the highest levels of government" were formulating "action plans" for guarding against biological forms of terrorism.
Clinton's aides said that he was horrified at the nerve gas attack on innocent civilians in the Japan subway system four years ago and that the attacks on the U.S. embassies in Africa, the World Trade Center, Khobar towers in Saudi Arabia, and Pan Am 103 had convinced him that sooner rather than later a disaster would happen in the United States.
Clinton disputes the idea that he has been reluctant to tackle the problem head on. He says he tightened security for diplomats and troops and air travelers, imposed economic sanctions on nations that support terrorists and tripled funding in the past five years for FBI anti-terrorist activities and bringing terrorists to justice.
He said that last spring when a "single failed electronic link" from a satellite malfunction disabled pagers, ATMs, credit card systems and TV networks around the world, he realized the potential for "tremendous harm" from deliberate acts of sabotage.
Last year, Clinton got a 39 percent increase for the fledgling chemical and biological weapons preparedness program to train local law enforcement and emergency personnel to deal with such threats.
Clinton wants to involve 120 cities in the program, which would resemble the quick-action efforts familiar to moviegoers and the modern equivalent of 1950-era bomb shelters. And just as he has ordered the nation's 1.4 million soldiers and 1 million reservists to be vaccinated against anthrax, he is considering vaccinating all emergency personnel in the entire country.
He said that next month he would ask Congress for a record $ 10 billion to fight terrorism.
Clinton wants a widespread deployment of small boxes that detect lethal chemicals and biological agents such as viruses so that precious time isn't wasted before emergencies are dealt with.
He says he wants new ways to detect intruders in sensitive computer systems. He wants a way to disseminate information to the private sector fast on emerging threats. And he wants to hire federal cyber-cops who can go after cyber-criminals.
Keenly aware that many are worried about the government mucking about in private computer records, Clinton said on Friday, "I want you to know that we will remain committed to uphold privacy rights and other constitutional protections as well as the proprietary rights of American businesses."
But his message Friday is certain to cause a lengthy debate about his very point that the danger is in undermining liberty in the name of liberty.
THE FUTURE OF TERRORISM

Load-Date: January 26, 1999


End of Document