Will work as team with concept of training, planning and execution: Pramod Boro
The Sentinel
December 19, 2020 Saturday


Copyright 2020 Omega Printers & Publishers Pvt Ltd, distributed by Contify.com All Rights Reserved
Length: 533 words
Byline: Our Correspondent
Body


KOKRAJHAR: Another five members belonging to the United People's Party Liberal (UPPL) and Bharatiya Janata Party (BJP) took the oath of office and secrecy in the new BTC executive council on Friday at the auditorium hall of the BTC Legislative Assembly at Bodofa Nwgwr, Kokrajhar.
The members who took oath include Katiram Boro as pro-tem speaker, Ukil Mushahary (UPPL) of Kokrajhar, Ranjit Basumatary (UPPL) of Chirang, Ranendra Narzary (BJP) of Baksa and Arup Kr. Dey (BJP) of Kokrajhar. The oath of office and secrecy was administered by Lower Assam Commissioner Rajesh Prasad in presence of chief of BTC, Pramod Boro and deputy chief Gabinda Chandra Basumatary. The oath-taking ceremony was also attended by MP Naba Kr. Sarania, MLA Ashok Singhal, BTC Principal Secretary Siddart Singh and other officers.
In his speech, BTC chief Pramod Boro said that the UPPL, BJP and Gana Suraksha Party (GSP) coalition government in BTC would work as team with collective responsibility. He said that the combined team would work with the concept of training, planning and execution. He also said that there was lack of proper planning and training to go forward for effective development for which execution of schemes became meaningless. He assured that his new government would adopt training for learning new ideas and comprehensive planning for development of all communities and proper execution of works. He further said that the respective officers would go to the field to assess whether the projects or development schemes were really completed or executed.
Boro said that his government would hold community-wise meetings to sort out their basic problems and the grievances redress cell would remain active. He also assured that the new government would not compromise on corruption and called upon all executive members to ensure transparency.
"Today the corruption is a greater threat than terrorism and militancy across the world and time has come to work together against it," he said, adding that there was lack of mechanism to check the projects or schemes being implemented and officials did not go to the field for proper verification. He assured that the developmental schemes would be reviewed properly.
The new BTC chief said that the selection of the remaining Executive Members (EM) and allotment of department would be made within 5-6 days in a fair manner. He called upon all to co-operate with the new government for smooth sailing of the council in order to bring development to all sections of people of the region.
Five members of the 4th BTC Executive Council with Pramod Boro as Chief Executive Member and Gabinda Chandra Basumatary as deputy Chief Executive Member, both from UPPL, took the oath of office and secrecy in a grand swearing-in-ceremony held at Green Field, Bodofa Nwgwr in Kokrajhar on December 15 in presence of Chief Minister Sarbananda Sonowal and State Finance Minister Dr. Himanta Biswa Sarma where over a lakh people gathered to see the ceremony. Three others who took the oath as EMs included Gautam Das and Diganta Baruah, both from BJP, and Ghanashyam Das from GSP. The oath of office and secrecy was administered by the Chief Secretary of Assam, Jishnu Baruah.

Load-Date: December 19, 2020


End of Document