Will U.S. now return
Chicago Daily Herald
August 5, 2008 Tuesday
C3 Edition


Copyright 2008 Paddock Publications, Inc.
Section: NEWS; Pg. 10
Length: 1179 words
Body


Will U.S. now return
to a military draft?
If McCain is elected and he continues the colonization of Iraq, he must immediately start the draft. There is no alternative.
Our all volunteer military can’t continue to prosecute wars in Iraq, Afghanistan (and possibly Iran) without approximately one million more trained soldiers.
Also, our old used up regular military gear and National Guard equipment needs to be replaced. Our military monster will accelerate our "borrow and spend" governmental policy.
So why aren’t we told now who the draftees will most likely be? We should have this talk now, so everyone will not be surprised.
Will it be a lottery? What age people will be draftable? Will it include women? Will illegal aliens be rooted out to be drafted or will they still be left alone to move up in the job market as those legally registered with the Selective Service Administration go off to war? Will college students be allowed to get five draft deferments like Cheney did? What, if any, will be the punishment for those who just move to another country until this "war thing" is over?
Though no one is talking about it much, tens of thousands of our soldiers were damaged so badly they couldn’t be soldiers anymore, let alone the approximately 4,200 dead.
And there are still no long lines of volunteers in front of the recruiting offices.
Jim Peterson
Hoffman Estates
Many good reasons
to drive an SUV
The article written by Mr. Taras in the Fence Post was a slanted point of view. We own an SUV and there are a number of reasons why.
1. Husband drove to work, which is 15-plus miles one way and changing jobs is out of the question. After work (in the winter) he would get out of work and his car would either be plowed in or the streets were not plowed.
2. Hip surgery and surgery to the spine limits access to small autos.
3. As far as SUVs speeding, look at the stats. I have seen more small autos swerving in and out of traffic than SUVs.
4. My husband was in the service and his brother was wounded in combat. So don’t, by any means, say we are treasonous.
Let’s put the blame rightly on the automobile manufacturers. The manufacturers knew at least 10 years ago that we would have a gas shortage. Remember 1980 when you had to stand in line for gas because of a shortage?
Speaking of gas guzzling, how about the Indianapolis 500 where a number of cars go around in a circle. Isn’t that a waste of gasoline? Is he calling the Indianapolis 500 treasonous?
Instead of pointing fingers, let’s put pressure on the manufacturer of the automobiles to give us the gas economy we need plus the advantages of the SUVs (traction) instead of all the bells and whistles.
Virginia Orr
Elk Grove Village
Muslims frequently
condemn terrorism
In his letter dated July 11th, Mr. Craig Meyer states he has never heard Muslims denouncing terrorism.
There is actually widespread and frequent condemnation of terrorism by Muslims worldwide.
Perhaps it doesn’t get the prominence in the mainstream American media as it should, but there is no shortage of Muslims speaking out against those who seek to hijack Islam with their message of hate and violence.
I would urge Mr. Meyer and other readers to simply search for the following phrase in Google: "Muslims denounce terrorism."
My broader concern is that Mr. Meyer’s assertion can encourage a way of thinking that makes Muslims guilty by association unless they actively and vocally denounce terrorism.
Iqbal Ahmed
Streamwood
Carbon dioxide,
global warming
What am I missing here?
So-called environmentalist "experts" tell us carbon dioxide is a major cause of global warming.
Green plants absorb a large portion of the carbon dioxide from the atmosphere in the summer. In the fall and winter, green plants go dormant and don’t absorb carbon dioxide.
According to environmentalist logic, since there is more carbon dioxide in the winter, winters should be warmer than summers.
Astronomers note the ice caps on Mars are receding due to Martian warming. Space probes find warming on other planets and their moons.
Has any one considered that the sun is the source of global and galactic warming?
Is it possible we are victims of a fantastic hoax? After all, Al Gore and others have huge financial interests in keeping the carbon dioxide scare going.
Donald Froelich
Mount Prospect
Fond memories
of Sen. Macdonald
Ginny Macdonald and I were friends and associates, both living in Arlington Heights, being active Republicans and members of the Illinois General Assembly together.
Ginny served her community, the County of Cook and the State of Illinois well and with integrity.
She was untiring in her efforts to do the right thing without political motives. And at the same time, take care of the needs of her husband, Alan, and children, Murph and Susan.
I’ll always remember Ginny, while the Legislature was not in session, competing with two seatmates, Harry Leinenweber and Phil Collins, in solving the daily crossword puzzle.
She’ll be sorely missed. May she rest in peace.
Gene Schlickman
Former State
Representative
Beverly Shores, Ind.
Kirk’s good, but he’s
not good enough
Like many political moderates in the 10th Congressional District, I believe Congressman Mark Kirk has been a good representative of our interests.
He has been a strong supporter of the environment, health care for our veterans and education.
In 2008, however, good is not enough.
Kirk has failed our district and country in his support for the Iraq war. He has been a reliable vote for going to war and for the $600 billion in continued funding. Common sense taxpayers like myself just shake our heads at the advances in health care, education and the environment that $600 billion could have achieved.
This election, I’m switching my vote to challenger Dan Seals.
Like Barack Obama, Seals believes the Iraq war was misguided from the start. Like Obama, Seals supports a responsible timetable for withdrawal. Like Obama, Seals understands that the U.S. needs to focus on other regions, like Afghanistan, that are key in the war on terror.
For these reasons, the 10th District needs a congressman who will bring change to Washington.
Ralph J. Banasiak
Palatine
Speaker Madigan is
failing to do his job
House Speaker Madigan, have you forgotten who you work for? In case you have, let me remind you that you work for the people of Illinois.
An important part of your job is interacting with the governor. Yet, you refuse to do that.
You won’t go to important meetings attended by the governor because you don’t like him; how juvenile.
You and your contingent fight the governor and his contingent and the Republicans look on from their ringside seats as if they were watching a sporting event. Meanwhile, our state teeters on the edge of insolvency.
I am not very fond of the governor either, but he is the governor, the one your party gave us. Fight him all you want, but don’t refuse to do your job just because you don’t like to be in the same room with him.
So, Mr. Madigan, grow up and do your job, the job you were elected to do, the job that we pay you to do. If you can’t, then step aside.
Ron Flowers
Elk Grove Village

Load-Date: December 22, 2008


End of Document