Will Cooperate with India to Combat Terrorism: Crown Prince
The Sentinel
February 20, 2019 Wednesday


Copyright 2019 Omega Printers & Publishers Pvt Ltd, distributed by Contify.com All Rights Reserved
Length: 397 words
Body


Guwahati: Saudi Arabia's Crown Prince Mohammad Bin Salman is on a day's visit to India to have a bilateral talk with India and gets a ceremonial welcome at the Rashtrapati Bhawan by Prime Minister Narendra Modi and President Ram Nath Kovind.

The bilateral talks have been held between the two leaders on terrorism and trade and Saudi Arabia has vowed to de-escalate rising tensions between Pakistan and India during the high profile summit in Islamabad.

During the talk, Saudi Prince said that relation between India and the Arabian Peninsula is in our DNA. He said that this relation is maintained and improved for the sake of both the countries and with the leadership of the President and the Prime Minister they can create good things for both Saudi Arabia and India.

It has also been discussed during the talk that the two nations are expected to set up a 'Strategic Partnership Council' at a ministerial level, planning joint naval exercises and overall upping of defence cooperation.

The two nations have also signed a Memorandum of Understanding (MoU) on tourism and cooperation in the field of housing. "We have made significant progress from 2016 till date and we have already pledged and invested 29,84,73,00,00,000.00 rupees in this time. Terrorism is a common concern and we will cooperate with India in every way like intelligence sharing," Crown Prince said.

After the talk with Saudi Arabia Prince, PM Modi said that they have also vowed to increase pressure on any country that promotes terror activities. "We have discussed in details all facets of our bilateral ties and welcomed Saudi Arabia's participation in India's growth and rising infrastructure," said Modi.

Modi also said that they have agreed to strengthen their cooperation in the areas of renewable energy. We welcome Saudi Arabia to the International Solar Alliance. "The peaceful use of nuclear energy especially water desalination and health will be another dimension of our cooperation," Modi said.

The Prime Minister further said that the economic, social and cultural links of India and Saudi Arabia are centuries old which is always conducive and friendly. He also said that with the Saudi Royal Highness' vision for India-Saudi ties and the century ahead, relations between our countries are at an all-time high. Saudi Arabia is among the select countries with whom India shares the most specialities.

Load-Date: February 20, 2019


End of Document