Will this jihadist be martyr to his faith?
USA TODAY
August 26, 2013 Monday
FINAL EDITION


Copyright 2013 Gannett Company, Inc. All Rights Reserved
Section: NEWS; Pg. 10A
Length: 477 words
Body


The Wall Street Journal, editorial: "Nidal Hasan defended himself in court and offered no summation at trial, suggesting to some that he wants to die so he can be a martyr to his faith. The Hasan case carried so much emotion precisely because the connection between the awful murders and the murderer's politically inspired motives remained so clear. Hasan's Army colleagues were in his mind enemies of Islam, so he slaughtered them. If there is a time and place for capital punishment, it is for such acts and motives as Hasan's."
Mark Steyn, National Review: "Hasan is a Virginia-born Army psychiatrist and a recipient of the Pentagon's Global War on Terrorism Service Medal, which seems fair enough, since he certainly served in it, albeit for the other side. Most Americans think he's nuts. He thinks Americans are nuts. It's a closer call than you'd think. ... Hasan says he's a soldier for the Taliban. Maybe if the Pentagon were to reclassify the entire Afghan theater as an unusually prolonged outburst of 'workplace violence,' we wouldn't have to worry about obsolescent concepts such as 'victory' and 'defeat.'"
Emil Maine, The Foundry: "While signals of Hasan's deadly attack on Fort Hood went unnoticed, or ignored, (the vast majority of) the foiled terror plots since 9/11 were thwarted in their early stages due to the vigilance of U.S. law enforcement and intelligence. With the global operating environment for terrorist networks having become increasingly hostile, lone-wolf terrorism has become more appealing to al-Qaeda sympathizers and other terrorists. Homegrown terrorist actors can often bridge the divide between the United States and the other regions of the world in which terrorist networks operate, frequently possessing the cultural and linguistic skills to move easily between the two. ... As Hasan's court-martial now moves into the penalty phase, it is important to remember that terrorists at home and abroad continue to plot to harm the United States and its citizens."
Leslie Marshall, U.S. News & World Report: "I am a staunch liberal, progressive, Democrat. And I am in favor of the death penalty. (But)  because of our desire to have that 'eye for an eye,' Hasan cannot plead guilty, for he would not receive the death penalty based on military law if he did. I think they are wrong for fighting so hard to end his life. They should accept his plea, throw him in a cell, toss the key. In seeking to sentence this man to death, we are causing his victims to face the man who shot them. He will cross examine them. He will be right there in person, in the flesh. ... Let's save the time, the money and the heartache for the victims and their families. Let Hasan plead guilty and let's all move forward and on with our lives. Never forgetting what he's done; but certainly forgetting his name and his face as he rots away in a cell." 

Load-Date: August 26, 2013


End of Document