Wilson honors veterans' service, sacrifice
The Wilson Daily Times (North Carolina)
November 11, 2020 Wednesday


Copyright 2020 The Wilson Daily Times
Distributed by Tribune Content Agency
Section: STATE AND REGIONAL NEWS
Length: 429 words
Byline: Olivia Neeley, The Wilson Daily Times, N.C.
Body


Nov. 11—Wilson Committee on Patriotism members didn't let the COVID-19 pandemic stop them from honoring veterans and active-duty troops Wednesday.
The annual Veterans Day ceremony, typically held at the Wilson County Courthouse, went virtual instead. The makeshift ceremony was held inside the Wilson City Council chambers and was streamed live on the city of Wilson's Vimeo channel and government access Channel 8 on Greenlight and other local cable systems.
The observance included the traditional wreath-laying in memory of fallen service members, a POW/MIA table ceremony honoring prisoners of war and those missing in action and patriotic music sung by Miss Wilson pageant winner Maddy McFarland.
Ray Chambers, chairman of the Wilson Committee on Patriotism, said he's happy the committee continued its tradition of honoring veterans and did so in a responsible, socially distanced way.
'OUR COUNTRY NEEDS OUR VETERANS'
U.S. Navy Chief Warrant Officer III Larry Sherrill, who is stationed at Marine Corps Air Station Cherry Point, was this year's keynote speaker. Sherrill's inspirational speech honored those who have sacrificed so much.
"Your service and sacrifice have kept our country safe and free," Sherrill said.
While Veterans Day is a time to profess appreciation for those who've served, Sherrill said it's important to remember that veterans "are defending the United States of America 365 days a year."
"Their heroism that has been demonstrated time and again by veterans from the American Revolution to the global war on terrorism is sometimes unnoticed by those of us who enjoy the security that their sacrifice has provided," he said. "Our debt to these heroes can never be repaid, but our gratitude and respect must last forever."
Sherrill said for many veterans, the nation was important enough to endure long separations from their families, miss the births of their children, freeze in sub-zero temperatures, bake in wild jungles, lose limbs and far too often lose their lives.
He also stressed the importance of veteran organizations that continue to support those who have served, along with their families and communities.
"Veterans need each other, but more importantly, our country needs our veterans," Sherrill said. "We do know without our veterans, America would not be America. Veterans have given us freedom, security and the greatest nation on earth. It is impossible to put a price on that."
___ (c)2020 The Wilson Daily Times (Wilson, N.C.) Visit The Wilson Daily Times (Wilson, N.C.) at www.wilsontimes.com Distributed by Tribune Content Agency, LLC.

Load-Date: November 12, 2020


End of Document