Winter Olympics organizers insured for terrorism risks; Insurance is in place; let the Games begin - Correction Appended
Business Insurance


 Correction Appended

Copyright 2002 Crain Communications Inc.
Section: Pg. 1
Length: 989 words
Byline: JOANNE WOJCIK
Body


SALT LAKE CITY-While businesses around the world are finding it increasingly difficult to obtain coverage against terrorist acts, the 2002 Olympic Winter Games crossed that finish line long ago.
Much of the property/casualty coverage for the Games, which take place Feb. 8 through Feb. 24 in Salt Lake City, was placed two or three years ago, so there are no terrorism exclusions in the policies, said Bill Moreton, president of Salt Lake City-based Fred A. Moreton & Co., broker for the Salt Lake Organizing Committee.
Since the Sept. 11 terrorist attacks, many insurers have sought to exclude terrorism coverage from commercial property/casualty policies, whereas prior to the attacks it was usually included at little or no extra cost.
In addition to standard property/casualty coverages-including coverage of the Games' athletic venues and workers compensation-organizers of the Olympics have event cancellation coverage, which includes coverage for terrorist attacks, Mr. Moreton said.
But even though SLOC's coverage is secure, ''some of the carriers had reinsurance problems,'' he said.
And at least one other entity that most Olympic athletes and attendants are likely to visit is not covered for terrorism: The Salt Lake City International Airport's liability insurers, Old Republic International Corp. in Chicago and Lloyd's of London underwriters, withdrew coverage for terrorism soon after the Sept. 11 attack on the World Trade Center, according to Richard Lane, founding partner and executive vp of Seattle-based Sullivan & Curtis of Washington, the airport's broker. The rest of the airport's liability program remained intact, however.
The airport was offered a separate $100 million terrorism policy by American International Group Inc., but it was ''too cost-prohibitive'' he said.
For example, ''the premiums for a one-year, $100 million policy were approximately 10 times what the existing premium was for the entire liability program previously,'' Mr. Lane explained.
As a result, the airport is essentially going bare for terrorism risks. However, it has instituted some indemnification requirements in its contracts with vendors and other affiliated businesses, Mr. Lane said.
In the meantime, the airport authority has said it is hoping the federal government will provide some assistance, such as a terrorism reinsurance backstop, so the facility can obtain coverage again.
So far, however, the only word coming from Washington is that the Justice Department will be cracking down on security at the Olympics, especially at sites away from athletic venues.
At the 1996 Olympic Games in Atlanta, one person was killed and more than 100 were injured when a pipe bomb exploded in an entertainment area in downtown Atlanta known as Centennial Park, which was away from the athletic venues.
Should terrorists attack any of the athletic venues at this year's Olympic Games, there will be insurance coverage under ''an interestingly layered program placed in the London and European markets,'' said Mr. Moreton.
He declined to provide coverage details or limits other than to say that the limits were ''appropriate for this type of event.'' Mr. Moreton added that the ''vast majority'' of the excess portion of the program was placed in Lloyd's by London broker Prentis Donegan & Partners Ltd. The coverage is led by Lloyd's syndicate 33, managed by Hiscox Syndicates Ltd.
The primary layer of SLOC's property/casualty insurance program was written by American Specialty Cos. Inc., a Roanoake, Ind.-based managing general agent that will also act as claims administrator for all components of the insurance program, with the exception of workers compensation, Mr. Moreton said.
Workers compensation coverage for the Games' approximately 4,000 full-time employees is underwritten by the Workers Compensation Fund of Utah, the state's competitive fund. The fund also covers some 40,000 to 50,000 volunteers, for whom workers compensation will be the exclusive remedy, according to Mr. Moreton.
Regents Blue Cross Blue Shield of Utah provides health insurance to SLOC employees under a traditional indemnity plan, according to a company spokesman.
Health coverage for Olympic athletes is provided by the Blue Cross & Blue Shield Assn., which is also a sponsor of the Games, according to David Mair, risk manager for the U.S. Olympic Committee in Colorado Springs, Colo. Anthem Benefits Administrators Inc. of Columbus, Ohio, is the claims administrator.
The coverage is a ''manuscripted hybrid program with a lot of traditional indemnity provisions but also access to Blue Cross & Blue Shield PPO networks nationwide,'' Mr. Mair said. The program also includes an extension-of-benefits provision for up to 52 weeks after an injury or illness occurs.
In addition to serving as SLOC's insurance broker, Fred A. Moreton is providing risk management services: SLOC's risk manager, Joanne Walker, is an employee of Fred A. Moreton, as are Greg Norman, safety director for the torch relay; Ned Leonard, special projects director; and Kim Aithen, administrative assistant.
The brokerage also has subcontracted with Simms Critical Incident Management Services of Sydney, Australia, to provide emergency and safety management consulting services. SIMS also was involved in the 2000 Olympic Games in Sydney.
Fred A. Moreton was selected to serve as broker and risk management consultant to the Salt Lake City Winter Games in 1996 after a competitive bidding process, according to Mr. Moreton.
The Utah-based broker already had as clients the state and the Delta Center, home of the Utah Jazz basketball team. Fred A. Moreton also is the insurance broker for the U.S. Ski & Snowboard Assn.
Given its experience, ''we knew the facilities and the exposures going in,'' Mr. Moreton said.
Fred A. Moreton is the 99th largest broker of U.S. business, according to the 2001 Business Insurance survey, based on 2000 revenues of $14.9 million (BI, July 16, 2001).
Correction

* A Feb. 4 article on insurance for the Winter Olympic Games omitted the name of Aviation Insurance Services of Utah Inc., which was selected to place aviation coverages.
Correction-Date: February 11, 2002

Graphic

 
Fears of terrorism at the 2002 Winter Games in Salt Lake City have prompted tight security at Olympic venues.

Load-Date: February 14, 2002


End of Document