Winter Games covered against cancellation
Business Insurance
February 6, 2006


Copyright 2006 Crain Communications All Rights Reserved
Section: WORLD; Pg. 17
Length: 825 words
Byline: CAROLYN ALDRED
Body


TURIN, Italy-As the world's best skiers, sledders and skaters steel their nerves ahead of this month's XX Winter Olympic Games, event cancellation insurance will help the organizers and other groups rest easy.
For the first time, the International Olympic Committee has purchased a $150 million event cancellation policy to cover financial losses for the Winter Games if they are canceled due to natural hazards, war or terrorism, an IOC spokeswoman confirmed. The Lausanne, Switzerland-based IOC bought $170 million in event cancellation coverage for the 2004 Summer Olympic Games in Athens (BI, Aug. 9, 2004).
Athletes and national athletic federations typically purchase other types of coverage, but the organizing committee did not elaborate on additional insurance arrangements.
The IOC said it plans to purchase similar policies for the 2008 Summer Games in Beijing and the 2010 Winter Games in Vancouver, British Columbia.
The $150 million policy for the Turin Games would only partially cover the IOC's losses if the event were canceled, but the coverage would be sufficient to ensure the future of the next games, said an IOC spokeswoman. She did not provide details on how much of the expected exposure the policy would cover.
The policy, which excludes cancellation triggered by diseases such as severe acute respiratory syndrome or avian flu, was brokered by London-based Benfield Group, according to the IOC. Much of the coverage is placed in the London market, sources say. Benfield would not comment on the placement.
Meanwhile, other organizations are also buying cancellation insurance for the Games.
Leading Lloyd's of London contingency underwriter David Bruce of Hiscox P.L.C. estimates that about $1 billion of coverage has been bought for the Winter Olympic Games. Many entities affiliated with the Games, including television companies, sponsors, local hoteliers and souvenir manufacturers, also buy cancellation coverage, he said.
Meanwhile, each policyholder will be looking for different coverage.
For example, a U.S. television company would be as concerned about the absence of U.S. competitors as the entire games being canceled, because there would be far fewer viewers and advertisers without a U.S. interest, Mr. Bruce observed.
Television companies also look to buy pre-emption coverage so that if a major domestic event occurs, such as the death of the president, revenues lost through a lack of advertising can be insured.
Broadcasters' investment in the Olympic Games varies but can be enormous because the Games attract huge audiences. For example, NBC Universal paid $613 million for U.S. broadcast rights to the Turin Games and $743 million for the Athens Games in 2004, according to Television Week, a sister publication of Business Insurance.
While the IOC would be most concerned about the Opening Ceremony, due to take place in Turin on Feb. 10, some sponsors may be concerned about a single competitor or event, said Mr. Bruce. He is the underwriter for syndicate 33 and divisional head of the specialty unit of Hiscox Global Markets, a unit of Hiscox P.L.C.
Market stable
Although there are two major international sporting events scheduled this year-this month's Olympics and the soccer World Cup in Germany in June-and several organizations already are seeking coverage for the 2010 Vancouver and 2012 London Olympic Games, the cancellation insurance market remains accommodating for policyholders, underwriters and brokers agree.
``There is more capacity now for simple cancellation business,'' said Danny Burns, contingency underwriter for Lloyd's syndicate 1183, managed by Talbot Underwriting.
``The market is very competitive, with more Lloyd's syndicates writing cancellation insurance,'' said Adrian Thomas, team leader of Sport and Contingency for Aon Ltd.
``The market is stable, with some underwriters even prepared to negotiate wider terrorism and communicable disease cover,'' agreed Toby Stubbs, property reinsurance underwriter for Brit Insurance Holdings Ltd. in London.
Although terrorism and communicable diseases generally are excluded from standard cancellation coverage, some underwriters say they are prepared to extend coverage.
Terrorism cover is usually limited on a ``time and distance'' basis, said Mr. Bruce. For example, a terrorist event must happen within a specified number of days before the insured event, such as 90, 60, 30 or 7 days, and within a certain distance of the event, such as 25 miles, underwriters explain.
Fear of terrorism forcing an event to be closed would not normally be underwritten.
While most underwriters refuse to cover avian flu risks, both Messrs. Burns and Bruce said they would be prepared to offer the coverage on a net retained basis. Mr. Burns stressed that Talbot would put some restrictions on avian flu cover to control the syndicate's aggregate exposure.
``We could come up with a price to cover avian flu if a policyholder wanted coverage,'' said Mr. Bruce.

Graphic

 
Art Credit: With the Winter Olympics due to start later this week, $150 million in cancellation coverage is in place for the event.
Art Credit: Reuters/Eric Gaillard

Load-Date: February 10, 2006


End of Document