WISCONSIN; Gunman kills 6 in Sikh temple; Suspect dies in shootout with police
Charleston Gazette (West Virginia)
August 6, 2012, Monday


Copyright 2012 Charleston Newspapers
Section: NEWS; Pg. P1A
Length: 745 words
Byline: Dinesh Ramde and Todd Richmond, The Associated Press
Body


OAK CREEK, Wis. - An unidentified gunman killed six people at a Sikh temple in suburban Milwaukee on Sunday in a rampage that left terrified congregants hiding in closets and others texting friends outside for help. The suspect was killed outside the temple in a shootout with police officers.
Police called the attack an act of domestic terrorism, but did not provide any details about the gunman or suggest a possible motive, including whether he specifically targeted the Sikh temple.
"We never thought this could happen to our community," said Devendar Nagra, 48, of Mount Pleasant, whose sister escaped injury by hiding as the gunman fired in the temple's kitchen. "We never did anything wrong to anyone."
Late Sunday, the investigation appeared to move beyond the temple as police, federal agents and the county sheriff's bomb squad swarmed a neighborhood in nearby Cudahy and evacuated several homes. Police roped off four blocks around a duplex, but the building's owner, Kurt Weins, said authorities would not say why they were there or if it was related to the shooting.
Oak Creek Police Chief John Edwards said police expected to release more information today. He said the FBI will lead the investigation because the shootings are being treated as domestic terrorism, or an attack that originated inside the United States.
"While the FBI is investigating whether this matter might be an act of domestic terrorism, no motive has been determined at this time," Teresa Carlson, special agent in charge of the agency's Milwaukee division, said in a statement Sunday night.
During a chaotic few hours after the first shots were fired around 10:30 a.m., police in tactical gear and armed with assault rifles surrounded the Sikh Temple of Wisconsin with armored vehicles and ambulances. Witnesses struggled with unrealized fears that several shooters were holding women and children hostage inside.
One of the first officers to respond to frantic 911 calls seeking help was shot several times as he tended to a wounded victim, and was listed in critical condition along with two other victims Sunday night, authorities said. Edwards said the gunman "ambushed" the officer, a 20-year veteran with tactical experience. A second officer then exchanged gunfire with the suspect, who was fatally shot. Greenfield police Chief Bradley Wentlandt said the officer underwent surgery and is expected to survive.
Jatinder Mangat, 38, of Racine, said his uncle, Satwant Singh Kaleka, the temple's president, was one of those shot. He did not know the extent of Kaleka's wounds. When he later learned that people had died, Mangat said, "it was like the heart just sat down."
"This shouldn't happen anywhere," he said.
Tactical units went through the temple and found four people dead inside and two outside, in addition to the shooter.
Gurpreet Kaur, 24, of Oak Creek, said her mother and a group of about 14 other women were preparing a meal in the temple kitchen when the gunman entered and started firing. Kaur said her mother felt two bullets fly past her as the group fled to the pantry. Her mother suffered what Kaur thought was shrapnel wound to her foot.
"These are people I've grown up with," she said. "They're like aunts and uncles to me. To see our community go through something like this is numbing."
Many Sikhs in the United States worship on Sundays at a temple, or gurdwara. A typical service consists of meditation and singing in a prayer room where worshippers remove their shoes and sit on the floor. Worshippers gather afterward for a meal that is open to community members, regardless of their religious beliefs.
Sikhism is a monotheistic faith founded more than 500 years ago in South Asia. It has roughly 27 million followers worldwide.
Observant Sikhs do not cut their hair; male followers often cover their heads with turbans - which are considered sacred - and refrain from shaving their beards. There are roughly 500,000 Sikhs in the United States.
Sikhs are not Muslims and the majority of them live in India.
The Sikh Temple of Wisconsin started in 1997 with about 25 families who gathered in community halls in Milwaukee. Construction on the temple in Oak Creek began in 2006, according to the temple's website.
AP photos
Sikh women await word on family members who were inside their Oak Creek, Wis., temple when a man came in and began shooting.
A police officer keeps watch Sunday as Sikhs wait outside their temple in Oak Creek, Wis., for word on shooting victims.

Load-Date: August 6, 2012


End of Document