Wise addresses summit on domestic terrorism Governor says states need to plan for many scenarios
Charleston Daily Mail (West Virginia)
July 11, 2001, Wednesday


Copyright 2001 Charleston Newspapers
Section: News; Pg. P7A
Length: 398 words
Byline: KARIN FISCHER
Body


DAILY MAIL WASHINGTON BUREAU
WASHINGTON - Taking a brief break from Southern West Virginia's devastating floods, Gov. Bob Wise traveled to Washington to address a different kind of emergency - domestic terrorism.
"I wish we hadn't got as much practice" dealing with floods and other natural disasters, Wise said Tuesday, proving his point by reciting the Federal Emergency Management Agency toll-free hotline by heart.
But West Virginia and other states are far less prepared to deal with domestic terrorism, said Wise, who was the keynote speaker at a National Governors Association summit on domestic terrorism.
In the wake of bombings at the World Trade Center and the federal building in Oklahoma City, both elected officials and citizens are waking up to the dangers of terrorist attacks on American soil.
West Virginia has become a leader in combating domestic terrorism, with West Virginia University and the West Virginia National Guard working to create a training center and training program for dealing with domestic terrorism.
Sen. Robert Byrd, D-W.Va., also has been supportive of homeland security issues.
Wise said he was sure every governor had a terrorism scenario that was "the kind of thing that makes them wake up at night." In West Virginia, that worry is about deliberate tampering with the Kanawha Valley's chemical plants, located in the heart of West Virginia's most populous region, only miles from the state capital, he said.
States need to develop homeland security plans to deal with bioterrorism, weapons of mass destruction, narcotics trafficking and, yes, natural disasters, Wise said.
Governors naturally play a leading role in response to and recovery from disasters; they should help create plans that both respond to local needs and work with other states and the federal government.
"States must - and I've got to really underline that word, must - be part of the preparation," Wise said.
Wise proposed a multi-part strategy to combat terrorist activities.
A centralized repository should be developed, building on information from first responders.
The system would include information on different types of attacks and how to combat and treat them.
A training course also should be created in which busy local law enforcement and emergency officials can easily take part.
Writer Karin Fischer can be reached at (202) 662-8732 or by e-mail at kfischer@dailymail.com.  

Load-Date: July 12, 2001


End of Document