Wise says state may need help in preparing terrorism plan State will require financial aid, advice if war goes on

Charleston Daily Mail (West Virginia)
October 25, 2001, Thursday


Copyright 2001 Charleston Newspapers
Section: News; Pg. P5A
Length: 352 words
Byline: KARIN FISCHER
Body


DAILY MAIL WASHINGTON BUREAU
WASHINGTON - West Virginia and other states may need financial help and expertise from the federal government in waging a war against terrorism, Gov. Bob Wise said.
In Washington Wednesday for the first time since the Sept. 11 attacks, Wise said he and his fellow governors hoped to be able to look to one of their own, former Pennsylvania Gov. Tom Ridge, as they struggle to deal with the new realities of homeland defense.
Ridge was appointed by President Bush to head the new Office of Homeland Security and began his new position earlier this month.
Wise said he already has joined other Southern governors in drafting a letter to Ridge, suggesting that the states may need federal assistance if the war wears on.
Wise was quick to say that West Virginia and other states are ready and willing to take on security issues and the accompanying costs.
"The question is, how long can we handle it without expanded resources?" Wise asked.
By resources, Wise means money and he wasn't prepared to say what amount. But he also means know-how.
Wise said he and his newly appointed homeland security liaison, Public Safety Secretary Joe Martin, are looking to the federal level for guidance on how to best deal with threats on the home front.
Wise said he did not have a clear idea of exactly how Martin would work with the office. "This is new for everybody," he said.
West Virginia officials also are looking to other states to share best practices and identify needs. Wise met Wednesday with staffers from the National Governors Association who work on domestic terrorism issues. He also saw Senate Appropriations Chairman Robert Byrd, D-W.Va., who has unveiled a package of spending increases to boost homeland defense, including $ 1 billion for state and local anti-terrorism efforts.
Communication and coordination among federal, state and local officials will be crucial in homeland security, Wise said. "This is a situation unlike any we've been in. The book's not been written on this one before."
Writer Karin Fischer can be reached at (202) 662-8732 or by e-mail at kfischer@dailymail.com.  

Load-Date: October 25, 2001


End of Document