With Terrorism Charges Dropped, Return of Doctor Is Celebrated
The New York Times
July 30, 2007 Monday
Late Edition - Final


Copyright 2007 The New York Times Company
Section: Section A; Column 0; Foreign Desk; Pg. 8
Length: 342 words
Byline: By THE ASSOCIATED PRESS
Dateline: BANGALORE, India, July 29 
Body


Mobbed by television cameramen, journalists and supporters, a 27-year-old doctor flew home to a hero's welcome Sunday in southern India after terrorism charges against him were dropped in Australia and he was freed.
  Looking relaxed and smiling, the doctor, Mohammed Haneef, was whisked from the airport to his family's home, where a celebratory feast was being held, after flying from Brisbane, Australia, earlier in the day. Dr. Haneef's jailing had aroused waves of sympathy in his native India.
  ''What can give a mother more happiness?'' said Qurrath-Ul-Ain. ''My child is free and he is coming home.'' She spoke as she passed around sweets to cousins and neighbors at her home, which was decked out with strings of jasmine flowers, balloons and streamers.
  In an emotional television interview earlier, Dr. Haneef said  he had no knowledge of involvement by relatives of his who have been accused of playing a role in a failed terrorist  attack in Britain last month. He said he would not have kept quiet if he had.
  Dr. Haneef was arrested July 2 at an airport in Brisbane as he was about to fly to India to see his wife and newborn daughter -- just days after his second cousins in Britain were arrested in a failed terrorist plot.
  Dr. Haneef was released Friday after Australia's chief prosecutor, Damian Bugg, said there was no evidence to support the charge that he provided reckless support to a terrorist organization. Dr. Haneef had given his cellphone SIM card to his cousin Sabeel Ahmed -- who is now accused in one of the June bomb plots -- when he left Britain for Australia a year ago.
  In a paid interview broadcast Sunday on the Nine Network in Australia, Dr. Haneef said supporting a terrorist organization was against his nature.
  Appearing close to tears, he said if he had suspected that his relatives -- Sabeel and Kafeel Ahmed -- were planning bombings in Britain, he would not have kept it to himself.
  ''I would have let the parents know first, who are the main sufferers now,'' Dr. Haneef said. ''I really feel for them.''

http://www.nytimes.com

Load-Date: July 30, 2007


End of Document