With War Declared on Terrorism, Insurance Companies Won't Have to Pay; Terrorism War Damage Not Covered By Insurance
Salt Lake Tribune (Utah)
September 23, 2001, Sunday


Copyright 2001 The Salt Lake Tribune
Section: Final; Pg. A1
Length: 1464 words
Byline: BY LINDA FANTIN , THE SALT LAKE TRIBUNE
Body


COPYRIGHT 2001, THE SALT LAKE TRIBUNE
Members of the International Olympic Committee can sleep better knowing their organization is not on the line financially should the 2002 Winter Games become a target of terrorism.
The rest of us should be so lucky.
The typical insurance policy, be it property/casualty, health or disability, is written to exclude acts of war. And while insurance regulators insist the Sept. 11 surprise attacks on the Pentagon and World Trade Center do not fit that definition, they also say that will no longer be the case now that President Bush has engaged the military and warned the nation of a lengthy, unrelenting counterattack.
Utahns, who for seven long years have prepared for the Olympics, now must confront a pair of sobering scenarios on the dawn of the big event: If Salt Lake City becomes a battleground in President Bush's war on terrorism, untold victims and their families could be mired in personal debt as well as pain and suffering. And if the Games are disrupted, canceled or postponed, state taxpayers could be buried in bills totaling hundreds of millions of dollars.
Mary Covington can see it all now.
Before the suicide hijackings, Covington, like most Americans, did not consider herself vulnerable to armed attacks and paid little attention to whether she was insured against them. Now she worries that the Olympics, with their own history of terrorism, have put Utahns at unnecessary risk of personal harm and financial ruin.
Covington's Salt Lake City company specializes in appealing denied insurance claims. In her 30 years working with the insurance industry she has never encountered a policy that covers acts of war. This past week she rifled through file cabinets and produced several contracts, including medical plans for the LDS Church, Geneva Steel, Wal-Mart and Utah's school districts, all of which state that injuries and other damage arising out of acts of war -- declared or undeclared -- are not covered.
Even her own employees, insured through Intermountain Health Care, are bare.
"If we go over and bomb Afghanistan and they bomb Salt Lake, we're all going to be in trouble," Covington says. "When all these people realize their insurance isn't going to cover this, there is going to be hell to pay."
Of course, money won't be the first or even most important concern if America is at war come February. But the deadly attacks on the Pentagon and World Trade Center have employers, insurance agents, workers compensation attorneys and Olympic officials investigating their options.
U.S. Olympic Committee spokesman Mike Moran says Blue Cross/Blue Shield promised last week not to invoke its act of war exclusions if U.S. athletes were injured during a Games-time attack.
On the flip side, Salt Lake City was notified Wednesday that such coverage was being stricken from the airport's $ 300 million general liability policy and the city's property damage coverage. Asked how the city would pay personal injury claims if a bomb hit the City-County Building during the Olympics, City Attorney Roger Cutler said it probably would not. The city, he says, is not liable for acts of war or someone else's intentional wrongdoing any more than it would be accountable for acts of nature.
Salt Lake Organizing Committee spokeswoman Caroline Shaw says its insurance policies cover acts of war but they are carefully defined. She would not say how.
Traditionally, act of war exclusions have been written with a more traditional definition of war in mind -- armed conflict between countries, not murderous acts committed by terrorists, says professor Robert Hoyt, head of the Insurance, Legal Studies, & Real Estate department at the University of Georgia's Terry College of Business.
The medical plan for The Church of Jesus Christ of Latter-day Saints, for example, defines war as "hostilities conducted by force or arms by one country against another country, or between countries or factions within a country, either with or without a formal declaration of war." It does not apply to missionaries or others pursuing specific out-of-country assignments authorized by the church.
SLOC President Mitt Romney says he has not put together a plan for if the Games are canceled, nor should he be expected to create contingencies for "unthinkable scenarios." When it comes to Olympic public safety, he insists, financial considerations are the least of his concerns. But he quickly adds that SLOC will pay only those liabilities required by law.
Or by contract.
NBC, for example, is entitled to all of its money back ($ 545 million in all, $ 261 million from SLOC ) if "all or substantially all of the events constituting the Games" are moved to another city, canceled and not rescheduled, or changed to start before Jan. 26, 2002, or after March 10, according to the network's contract.
SLOC has $ 150 million of event cancellation insurance -- a relative pittance when compared to the NBC deal, the $ 99 million owed the state for venue construction and maintenance and the $ 180 million or so in tickets that would need to be refunded.
The fact that SLOC is covered for cancellation at all is somewhat of a coup. The insurance policy was purchased in 1996 over the objections of IOC members Anita DeFrantz and Jim Easton, who said the Games would never be called off, according to executive committee minutes and officials who were present.
"I'm appreciative of the real businessmen on the board, Verl [Topham] and Spence [Eccles], who fought for it because the IOC members had this inflated view that the Olympics would solve all the world's problems," said trustee Ken Bullock, noting that he didn't believe it then and doesn't buy it now.
"The Olympics are a wonderful event and they have the power to bring people together, but let's get real. When you're going to war, the world's not going to take a time out because we're having the Olympics here."
That is not exactly the view advanced by Romney or IOC President Jacques Rogge. The Games, they insist, are even more relevant today -- a respite from war and a place for the world to heal. Volunteers, who are showing up en masse for training sessions, agree.
But they might change their minds when they read the fine print on their own health insurance policies, says longtime Olympic critic Stephen Pace.
Pace lives a half-mile from the LDS Church-owned parking lot being converted into an Olympic medals plaza. Organizers, he says, "took about a heartbeat's worth of consideration" before stating the Games would continue.
"Mitt's a real smart guy and he has a real gift for happy talk," Pace says. "But then you realize that your health insurance or homeowners policy is about as good as his super-secret security plan. They have basically bet my house on the Games."
Questions of taxpayer liability have never been adequately addressed by Utah lawmakers, Pace says, referring to a circle of indemnification agreements in which Salt Lake City agreed to not hold SLOC and the IOC liable, the state agreed to cover the city, and SLOC agreed to back the state.
"If we're putting this thing on to make a national statement, there ought to be some national backup, a federal guarantee," Pace says.
In some ways, there is. The Federal Emergency Management Agency provides disaster relief funds, and the Department of Justice provides medical and other financial assistance to victims of crimes. Both programs are expected to pay out millions of dollars to those affected by the Sept. 11 tragedies.
Workers Compensation Fund of Utah may or may not be another safety net for Utahns victimized by a similar disaster, says attorney Dennis Lloyd. It depends on whether workers are put in harm's way by their jobs or whether they just happen to work in the neighborhood. For example, a reporter sent to cover a medals ceremony in downtown Salt Lake City might be more successful in filing a claim than, say, a Triad Center employee who just happens to work nearby.
If an employee is injured trying to escape the building, it gets even more complicated, Lloyd says.
"If an individual is injured by flying glass as the result of a bomb at the medals plaza, you could argue that is not covered. But if that person slipped going down the stairs, now they have a broken leg and a good argument could be made that the leg injury is covered."
Perhaps not for long.
Professor Hoyt predicts the insurance industry will act quickly to broaden acts of war exclusions to include any armed conflict, including acts of terrorism.
"Every one of us is thinking about what our risk is and how do we finance it. It's happening at the individual level, at the company level and the corporate boardroom level," Hoyt says. "And now we know we face heightened risk of terrorism, our insurance coverage for that will clearly be limited."

Load-Date: September 24, 2001


End of Document