With one notable exception, Carlos was no Jackal
St. Petersburg Times (Florida)
August 17, 1994, Wednesday, City Edition


Times Publishing Company
Section: NATIONAL; THE WORLD; Pg. 2A; COLUMN
Length: 955 words
Byline: JACK R. PAYTON
Dateline: WASHINGTON
Body


It's amazing, sometimes, what a good nickname will do for you. Take Ilich  Ramirez Sanchez, for example.
If he had come to be known as "Ilich," would anybody be talking about him  this week, much less speculating about the end of international terrorism as  we know it?
But because this obscure Venezuelan-born leftist got pinned with a sexy  nickname - "Carlos the Jackal" - he became the most famous hired killer in  the world, a terrorist sought by the security services of various countries  for the past 20 years.
CARLOS
His reputation was so extraordinary, so awesome, that the leaders of Sudan,  a fundamentalist Islamic country in Africa, apparently thought they could get  back in the good graces of the West by turning over the elusive "Carlos" to  the French on Monday.
If my guess is right, the Sudanese are finding out about now that Carlos  isn't quite what they thought he was. Instead of being a valuable asset whose  arrest and extradition would win them points in Washington, the Sudanese are  learning that Carlos was in fact highly overrated.
In practical terms, that means that Sudan can forget about getting off the  U.S. State Department's list of nations that support terrorism any time soon.  To make that happen, the extremists who have been running the government in  Khartoum the past five years will have to do a lot more than giving up the  likes of Ilich Ramirez Sanchez, washed-up former hit man.
Sanchez - or more properly, the "Carlos the Jackal" persona he gladly  assumed - was largely a media creation, always good for a zippy headline or  exotic tale of derring-do. With one spectacular exception, terrorism experts  considered his real exploits fairly mediocre.
The Israelis, who know more about Middle East terrorism than all the  Washington think-tankers multiplied by three, have said all along that Carlos  was never anywhere near the master killer we came to know from newspaper and  TV accounts in the 1970s. They have said from the beginning, for instance,  that Carlos had nothing to do with the 1972 Olympic massacre in Munich or the  1976 hijacking of an Air France plane to Uganda, both widely attributed at the  time to the Venezuelan.
Carlos' over-inflated reputation was based, it turns out, on three things:
The first was a 1973 movie entitled The Day of the Jackal that was in turn  based on the Frederick Forsyth thriller novel. The title role, played by the  English actor Edward Fox, was a mysterious contract killer who fails in an  attempt to assassinate Charles de Gaulle and is then killed by French police.
The "Jackal," as played by Fox, was handsome, sophisticated, a master of  seduction, disguise and escape as well as being thoroughly cold-blooded and  ruthless. The movie was wildly popular about the same time Ilich Ramirez  Sanchez was first making his mark in terrorism.
The connection in the popular imagination between Sanchez and the fictional  Jackal was almost inevitable, especially since the Venezuelan was operating at  the time in France, the setting of the movie.
The other factors in confirming the myth of Sanchez as Carlos the Jackal  were a bit more substantial.
In January 1975, Sanchez tried and failed to blow up an Israeli El Al  airliner at Orly Airport outside Paris. Instead, he hit a Yugoslav airliner  with a rocket-propelled grenade. Sanchez, hiding out in his Paris apartment,  then killed two French investigators who came to arrest him and escaped.
Then later that year, Sanchez scored his one truly spectacular success as a  terrorist - the kidnapping of oil ministers from the Organization of Petroleum  Exporting Countries who were meeting in Vienna. The oil ministers were freed  only after OPEC member nations paid hundreds of millions of dollars in ransom.
After this stunning achievement, the now infamous Carlos, the world's  foremost terrorist, began fading from the front lines of international  intrigue. Terrorist acts reliably attributed to him in the following years  were mainly directed at the French and designed to win freedom for his lover,  a German-born leftist named Magdalena Kopp.
When Carlos finally won her release from a French jail with a string of  bombing attacks, the two were reunited in Damascus, Syria, and got married.
In Damascus, Carlos came under the close scrutiny of the Baathist  government headed by President Hafez Assad, who wouldn't put up with terrorist  freelancers not completely under his control. But by this time, Carlos had  nowhere else to go. His former allies in the Soviet bloc were gone. There was  no more Communist East Germany, Czechoslovakia or Hungary in which to seek a  more comfortable refuge.
Early this year, the Syrians finally got tired of keeping Carlos around. He  was unreliable, untrustworthy and of no further use. The Syrian security  service put Carlos on a plane to Khartoum with a phony diplomatic passport and  discreetly passed the word to the West. Assad, it seems, wanted to get a  little credit for this but was smart enough to know it wouldn't be much.
The Sudanese, however, apparently decided it was worthwhile trying to drive  the best bargain they could with France, the one nation still hot on the  Carlos trail. Someday soon we may even find out what the deal entailed.
Because despite its stated respect for international law and justice on  Tuesday, you can be sure the Sudanese didn't give up Carlos/Sanchez for  nothing.
One leftist newspaper in Paris speculated the French government paid for  Carlos by giving the Sudanese intelligence information that will help the  extremists in Khartoum locate and annihilate rebels in southern Sudan.
That may be a bit far-fetched, but you can bet there's a lot more to this  Carlos arrest than the French are letting on.

Load-Date: August 18, 1994


End of Document