With ties to N.Y., he helps insure U.S. companies against terrorism
 The Philadelphia Inquirer
JANUARY 5, 2004 Monday CITY-D EDITION


Copyright 2004 Philadelphia Newspapers, LLC  All Rights Reserved


Section: BUSINESS; Pg. C02
Length: 1081 words
Byline: Thomas J. Brady
Body


If you wanted to put a human face on industry's fight against terrorism, you could hardly find one better than that of William E. Wise.
A former Marine who stands just under 6-foot-4, Wise was named last month as vice president in charge of Ace USA's Terrorism Underwriting Unit.
"The unit was actually established prior to Sept. 11," Wise said during a recent interview in his Center City office. "But Sept. 11 heightened the need for different insurance due to the magnitude of the loss."
Wise, 47, explained that Ace's policy was a supplement to the Terrorism Risk Insurance Act, passed in November 2002, which provides insurance against terrorist acts in the United States.
He added that Ace's policy was meant to provide insurance for terrorist acts against U.S.-domiciled companies that take place outside the United States.
Noting that the J.W. Marriott hotel in Jakarta, Indonesia, was attacked by a suicide bomber in August, he said: "Mr. Marriott would've been the perfect client for our policy." Marriott International Inc. was not a client.
He said the policy provides property-based physical-damage protection against a catastrophic event up to a limit of $100 million.
Although Wise would not reveal how many policies Ace has sold, he said: "I can tell you, we have done dozens of $100 million deals around the globe."
He said the insurance covers catastrophic or significant damage to a building, including business interruption and the expense to rebuild.
In his new job, Wise is in charge of a four-person unit based in Philadelphia.
During his first eight months on the job, he said he expected to be on the road about half the time, mainly visiting insurance brokers.
Before being named to head the unit, Wise had been vice president and chief operating officer of Ace Diversified Risk, where he oversaw day-to-day operations and audit-compliance activities.
Both are part of the Ace Group of Cos., based in Bermuda, which had $12.6 billion in gross premium revenue in 2002 and which has more than 9,000 employees globally. It has approximately 2,000 in the Philadelphia region alone.
Before joining Ace in 2002, Wise was vice president of Munich-American Risk Partners in Princeton.
"I come from a New York City Fire Department family," he said, noting that the department "took a devastating loss," with 343 members killed in the World Trade Center attack. "I knew 25 of them, and my uncle [Thomas Von Essen] was the commissioner," he noted. Wise requested that other details of his private life not be revealed out of security concerns.
Asked whether he felt that Ace was capitalizing on tragedy, he said: "Emphatically not. We underwrite risk. This is a risk. I don't feel like I'm capitalizing on tragedy at all. I sleep very well at night."
In his office, he keeps a bent railroad spike that he found at ground zero soon after Sept. 11 as a reminder of the ferocity of the attack. He keeps it in a beer glass that came from the Tall Ships Bar and Grill, on the ground floor of the South Tower of the World Trade Center, where he used to occasionally meet with friends.
They are a reminder of a day of attacks about which he feels too many Americans are becoming complacent. And he repeats his mantra concerning that day: "Never forget."
*
Payne Brown has been named vice president of strategic initiatives at Comcast Corp. He had been vice president of strategic initiatives at Comcast Cable.
Nae J. Dun has been named professor and chair of the Department of Pharmacology at the Temple University School of Medicine. He had been professor and chair of the Department of Pharmacology at the James H. Quillen College of Medicine at East Tennessee State University.
Diamond Furniture, a chain of six furniture stores throughout the Philadelphia and South Jersey area, has named Beverly Gatti director of administration. She had been corporate office manager.
Tim Dollarton has been named director of merchandising. He had been a buyer.
Robert Butz has been named vice president of global regulatory affairs at MDS Pharma Services, a Montreal drug-discovery and -development company. He is based in King of Prussia. He had been president and chief operating officer of Polymerix Corp., a biomaterials company focusing on polymer-based drugs and medical-device coatings, based in Piscataway, N.J.
Kathryn Dunlap has been named chief operating officer of the Evergreens, a continuing-care retirement community in Moorestown. She had been vice president of operations.
Lynn Marsden-Atlass has joined the Pennsylvania Academy of the Fine Arts as senior curator. She had been curator of American and contemporary art at the Chrysler Museum of Art in Norfolk, Va.
Audrey Schneider has also joined the academy, as director of the 200th anniversary celebration. She had been awards manager of the Chemical Heritage Foundation.
Joanne Wszolek joined the academy as director of security. She had been special services manager for the Department of Campus Safety Services for the Temple University Police Department.
Jane Crawford has been named vice president of public affairs of Atofina Chemicals Inc., Philadelphia. She has also been named president of the Atofina Chemicals Foundation. She had been director of corporate communications.
Roger Jehenson has joined PointRoll, a Fort Washington company that specializes in developing advertising technologies, as vice president of business development and publisher relations. He had been president of American Revenue Consulting Inc., an early-stage financial business development company in Manhattan.
Joy Wheeler has been named vice president for channel development for PointRoll's Yahoo relationship. She had been director of global accounts for the Tech Solutions Division at DoubleClick, a New York City online advertising company.
James O'Brien has been named director of marketing at PointRoll. He had been president and chief executive officer of Impact Strategies Inc., a marketing and political consulting agency based in Washington.
Jack W. Kennedy III has been named regional leader for the South Jersey region of Edward Jones, a Woodbury financial-services firm. He will be in charge of 48 offices in the region. He had been mentor-trainer for the region.
Lilly Pulitzer, a King of Prussia apparel retailer, has promoted Linda Bradbury to vice president of production. She had been director of production.
Andrew E. Harris has been named chief executive officer of Warminster Hospital. He had been chief executive officer at Elkins Park Hospital.

Notes

People in the News

Graphic

 
PHOTO;
MICHAEL PEREZ, Inquirer Staff Photographer
William E. Wise is vice president in charge of Ace USA's Terrorism Underwriting Unit. Wise, 47, said Sept. 11 heightened the need for his division. The unit provides insurance for terrorism perpetrated on U.S.-domiciled companies that takes place outside the United States.
Payne Brown has been named vice president of strategic initiatives
at Comcast Corp.
Nae J. Dun: Professor and chair of Temple medical school's Department of Pharmacology.
Kathryn Dunlap is chief operating officer of the Evergreens
in Moorestown.
Lynn Marsden-Atlass is senior curator
at the Pennsylvania Academy of the
Fine Arts.
Audrey Schneider is director of the 200th anniversary celebration at the fine arts academy.
Jane Crawford is vice president of public affairs and chief of the foundation at Atofina Chemicals.

Load-Date: August 21, 2005


End of Document