With ties strained, Bush and Putin seek to show unity Iran, terrorism and trade are on agenda as they meet in South Korea.
St. Louis Post-Dispatch (Missouri)
November 18, 2005 Friday
THIRD EDITION


Copyright 2005 St. Louis Post-Dispatch, Inc.
Section: NEWS; Pg. A15
Length: 600 words
Byline: By Terence Hunt THE ASSOCIATED PRESS
Dateline: BUSAN, SOUTH KOREA 
Body


Glossing over differences straining their political relationship, President George W. Bush and Russian President Vladimir Putin greeted each other warmly today in talks expected to emphasize cooperation in the war on terrorism and the campaign to stop North Korea's nuclear ambitions.
The two leaders apparently were still at odds over how to address Iran's nuclear program. There also were long-running differences over the U.S.-led invasion of Iraq and U.S. concern that Russia is retreating from democracy. They exchanged pleasantries, but they offered no public remarks on the issues they face. 
"Hey Vladimir. How are you? Looking good," Bush said. "I always enjoy a chance to have a good discussion with you. You're right. We've got a very important relationship. We value your advice."
Bush asked Putin if he wanted to address reporters. Putin said he did not. Bush shrugged and said, "OK, me neither." The two leaders then retreated to seats out of earshot from reporters.
Today's meeting was the fifth between Bush and Putin this year, after talks in Moscow; Washington; Bratislava, Slovakia; and Gleneagles, Scotland. Despite their disputes, they're on a first-name basis and emphasize their friendship, which was strengthened when Putin stepped forward and supported Bush after the terrorist attacks of Sept. 11, 2001.
Bush and Putin were meeting in a hotel suite before the opening of the annual Asia Pacific Economic Cooperation forum. The White House said the key topics would be Iran, North Korea, terrorism, trade, Moscow's goal of joining the World Trade Organization by the end of the year and developments in Russia.
Bush met with Southeast Asian leaders to underscore U.S. interest in the region, one of the battlegrounds in the fight against terrorists. Bush was interested in asking the leaders to exert their influence on the military junta in Myanmar, which Secretary of State Condoleezza Rice said was "one of the worst regimes in the world" for its record on human rights and free speech.
Putin has refused to support Bush in the president's eagerness to go to the U.N. Security Council with suspicions that Iran is trying to build a nuclear arsenal. Over U.S. objections, Russia is building a nuclear reactor for a power plant in Iran, an $800 million project the United States fears could be used to help develop nuclear arms.
Putin says that he shares the U.S. goal of an Iran without nuclear arms but that he has been assured Tehran has no ambitions for developing a nuclear weapon and instead wants its program for civilian energy use alone.
Bush and Putin have generally agreed on a need to avert the spread of nuclear weapons technology to other nations, including North Korea. Russia is a partner with the United States, China, Japan and South Korea in talks aimed at persuading North Korea to halt its nuclear program in return for energy and security guarantees.
The political relationship between Bush and Putin has frayed, in part because of U.S. concerns that Putin is consolidating power in the Kremlin and eroding democratic advances in post-Soviet Russia.
While Russia backed the United States in the war in Afghanistan, Putin vehemently opposed the invasion of Iraq.
Putin has been outspoken about the fight against terrorism, but U.S. officials accuse Russia of turning a blind eye on what they call Iranian and Syrian support for terrorists.
Russian officials accuse the United States and European nations of maintaining double standards on terrorism and have repeatedly lashed out at them for granting asylum to Chechen rebel figures whom the Russians consider terrorists.

Graphic

 
PHOTO
 PHOTO - President George W. Bush is greeted by monks Thursday during his visit to the Bulguksa Temple in Gyeongju, South Korea. The Associated Press 

Load-Date: November 19, 2005


End of Document