WITH NO COLD WAR, HIS ENEMY: TERRORISM
 The Philadelphia Inquirer
JANUARY 30, 2000 Sunday D EDITION


Copyright 2000 Philadelphia Newspapers, LLC  All Rights Reserved


Section: FEATURES BOOKS; Pg. K02
Length: 868 words
Byline: Thomas J. Brady, INQUIRER STAFF WRITER
Body


As befitting his action-adventure novels, Nelson DeMille is a two-fisted writer, scrawling his words on yellow legal pads with a No. 1 pencil in his right hand while using his left hand to wield a cup of java, smoke a cigarette, or even consult a reference book.
And his latest, The Lion's Game (Warner Books, $26.95), is a testament not only to his great storytelling skills but also to his superb attention to detail.
The Lion's Game is an incredibly fast-paced thriller (especially remarkable considering its 677 pages) concerning Libyan terrorist Asad Khalil (his name means "the Lion") and his jihad, or mission, to wreak havoc on the shores of America and specifically to kill anyone he can find associated with the April 15, 1986, bombing of Tripoli by American forces, a bombing that killed his mother and four young siblings as well as the adopted baby daughter of "the Great Leader," Col. Moammar Gadhafi.
As to why he decided to write about terrorism, DeMille said during a recent interview: "The subject of international terrorism has always fascinated me. If the Cold War were still on, I think I'd be writing Cold War novels. But it's a matter of identifying the enemy. If you're writing a thriller, you need an enemy, and I really think that we're going to see a lot more terrorism on American soil in this new decade unless we do something about it." Asked how we should deal with international terrorism, he said: "We should handle it through the CIA [before it reaches U.S. soil]. The CIA should identify who these people are and then take them out, just the way the Israeli intelligence people do. . . . We can't assassinate heads of state, but we can knock off everybody else," he says.
DeMille also says that in writing The Lion's Game, he wanted to bring back John Corey, the now-retired New York City police detective who was the hero of his previous blockbuster, Plum Island. It's the first time DeMille has brought back a character. In The Lion's Game, Corey is recovered from being shot and working as a special agent for the Anti-Terrorist Task Force. "I never thought I'd do that [bring back a character]," he says. As to why he did it, he says simply, "Popular demand," adding, "I read my fan mail" (including readers' comments on Amazon.com).
And now that he's done it once, he plans a quick encore with another character, Paul Brenner, the military investigator played by John Travolta in the movie version of The General's Daughter. In the book he's writing now, Paul Brenner goes to Vietnam to investigate the murder of an officer 30 years before: "The prime suspect is now a United States senator who is about to run for president."
And after it took so long for a movie to be made from one of his novels (the successful The General's Daughter), Columbia Pictures has just optioned both Plum Island and The Lion's Game.
DeMille, an Army lieutenant who was a platoon leader in Vietnam, was with the First Cavalry Division when it "broke the siege of Khe Sanh" in March 1968 and participated in the battle of Quang Tri during the Tet offensive. Two years ago, he returned to Vietnam where he "did a memorial tour of the battlefields." He says he first began seriously writing when keeping a combat diary, in which he went beyond marking down routine details to include "how I felt."
Back in the States after his tour of duty, DeMille worked as an insurance investigator before becoming a reporter for Law Officer magazine and writing four pulp-fiction books with the overall title Joe Ryker: NYPD. He wrote his first successful big novel, By the Rivers of Babylon, in 1978. The Lion's Game is his 10th major novel, "not counting the paperback pulpers." His novels have sold more than 30 million copies worldwide.
When doing research, DeMille uses local libraries, including the one at his alma mater, Hofstra University, as well as the Internet. He also uses a professional researcher. "He's like a detective," he says. "He'll give me all the specifics of say, C-4, standard plastic explosives." For research on the aeronautical aspects of The Lion's Game, he consulted Thomas Block, with whom he cowrote Mayday. He also says, "I was fortunate in that I had friends in the Anti-Terrorist Task Force who gave me a lot of information."
DeMille, 56, lives in a million-dollar Victorian home in Garden City on New York's Long Island with his second wife, Ginny. He has two children from his first marriage, daughter Lauren, 22, and son Alex, 19. He also has a stepson, Ryan, 26.
When writing, DeMille says he uses the aforementioned No. 1 pencil applied to yellow legal pads. "I find it a really good, easy process for me because it goes right from the brain to the hand." He then has his secretary type it into a word processor. "I love the technology, I just don't use it myself," he says. It generally takes him about a year and a half to write a book.
DeMille says he generally works from noon till 8 p.m., writing 3,000 to 4,000 words, at least "once the book gets rolling. It starts slowly, then starts to roll after awhile. Just like a plane going down the runway, it picks up speed."
* Nelson DeMille will appear at Borders, 1727 Walnut St., Philadelphia, at 7:30 p.m. Friday. 215-568-7400.

Notes

The Author Nelson DeMille

Graphic

 
PHOTO;
PHOTO
Nelson DeMille

Load-Date: January 30, 2002


End of Document