Witness in Terrorism Case Recalls Being Taken Hostage
The New York Times
May 7, 2014 Wednesday
Late Edition - Final


Copyright 2014 The New York Times Company
Section: Section A; Column 0; Metropolitan Desk; Pg. 22
Length: 629 words
Byline: By BENJAMIN WEISER
Body


The group of tourists was traveling in December 1998 when their convoy in Yemen was ambushed by armed militants who then took them hostage. The next day, with the sound of gunfire around them, one kidnapper turned to the group and said, ''It's goodbye to you all,'' one former hostage testified in federal court in Manhattan on Tuesday.
''I hoped it meant that they were getting ready to release us,'' the former hostage, Margaret Thompson, one of two United States citizens who was kidnapped, testified. ''But I feared it meant that they thought we were going to die.''
Ms. Thompson's testimony came in the trial of Mostafa Kamel Mostafa, an Egyptian-born cleric extradited from Britain in 2012 who has been charged with conspiring with the kidnappers of the 16 tourists, many of them Britons and Australians. Four of the tourists were killed when Yemeni authorities mounted a rescue attempt and the kidnappers used hostages as human shields.
Federal prosecutors have said that Mr. Mostafa, who is also known as Abu Hamza al-Masri, provided a satellite phone to the leader of the militants. A federal indictment charged that Mr. Mostafa received three calls on the satellite phone the day before the ambush, and spoke with the leader after it was underway and offered him advice.
''Abu Hamza played a vital role in that kidnapping,'' a prosecutor, Edward Y. Kim, told the jury last month.
Mr. Mostafa, 56, has also been charged with planning to establish a terrorist training camp in Bly, Ore., and with providing assistance to Al Qaeda in Afghanistan; he could face a life prison term if convicted.
A defense lawyer, Joshua L. Dratel, said in his opening statement that Mr. Mostafa had not given directions to the militants and had tried to ''negotiate the release of the hostages,'' to keep people ''from getting hurt.''
The trial is in its fourth week. Prosecutors are expected to rest their case on Wednesday, after the other American taken hostage, Mary Quin, testifies. The defense has said that Mr. Mostafa will testify when the defense begins its case.
The jury seemed riveted by the testimony of Ms. Thompson, who had been working in London at the time she took the trip to Yemen.
A diminutive woman, she limped as she entered the courtroom and walked to the witness stand. Her limp, she said, was a result of being shot when she was a hostage.
''I was hit in the leg with a bullet from behind,'' she told the jury. ''My left leg.'' She said the bullet had shattered her femur, requiring surgery and leaving her with a leg that is shorter and not as flexible as it once was. ''I'm very limited in how far I can walk,'' she said.
The tour group had included teachers and university lecturers, executives and a musician. They were heading for the city of Aden when their convoy was intercepted by the militants, who collected passports and asked which hostages were Americans.
Prosecutors have said that one of Mr. Mostafa's motivations for conspiring in the hostage-taking was to pressure the Yemeni government to release a group of Britons who had been arrested earlier, among them Mr. Mostafa's stepson.
Ms. Thompson said that the leader, speaking through an interpreter, had told the hostages, ''It's not your fault that your countries bombed Iraq.''
''He said: 'You're going to be safe. Everything is going to be O.K. We have friends in prison and we're going to keep you until they're released.' ''
After Ms. Thompson and the other hostages were rescued by the Yemeni authorities, she said, many of them were airlifted by helicopter to a hospital. She recalled the flight: She and a second injured woman lay on stretchers on the floor; others sat on a bench. The bodies of two hostages who had been killed were also there.
''They were covered in a blanket at my feet,'' she said.

http://www.nytimes.com/2014/05/07/nyregion/witness-in-terrorism-case-recalls-being-taken-hostage-in-yemen.html

Graphic

 
PHOTO: Mostafa Kamel Mostafa, an  Egyptian-born cleric, in 2004. (PHOTOGRAPH BY ODD ANDERSEN/AFP/GETTY IMAGES)       

Load-Date: May 7, 2014


End of Document