Witnesses favor eco-terrorism law Nethercutt bill stiffens penalties against harassers, those who sabotage facilities;

Spokesman Review (Spokane, WA)
February 13, 2002 Wednesday Spokane Edition


Copyright 2002 Spokane Spokesman-Review
Section: THE REGION; Pg.B2
Length: 516 words
Byline: Jodi Sokolowski, Staff writer
Dateline: WASHINGTON<
Body


People who try to sabotage timber sales and research facilities and who
 harass Forest Service employees could see stiffer penalties, funds frozen and
 an increase in surveillance.
 ''It's time we draw a line in the sand and let eco-terrorists know we will
 not stand for terrorism of any kind in our homeland," said Rep. George
 Nethercutt, who introduced the Agro-terrorism Prevention Act of 2001 last
 year.
 The proposed bill also would broaden definitions to protect plant and
 animal research that is conducted mostly at universities, allow the FBI to
 investigate crimes under the Racketeer Influenced Corrupt Organizations Act,
 and create a clearinghouse to allow local, state and federal law enforcement
 to work together.
The house subcommittee on forest and forest health heard testimony Tuesday
 on how the proposed legislation could help prosecute groups like the Earth
 Federation Front and the Animal Liberation Front.
 Witnesses included a former Forest Service supervisor who said employees
 are harassed and intimidated by these groups regularly. Employees are
 encouraged to not wear uniforms, not drive the service's green vehicles, not
 to go into the field alone (especially women), and to ''run and hide" if they
 notice a possible confrontation.
 Rep. Nick Rahall, D-W.Va., said terrorist groups hurt the working class and
 drive up prices.
 ''They really hurt the cause they believe in by resorting to violence," he
 said.
 An FBI chief on domestic terrorism said members of ELF and ALF have
 committed more than 600 criminal acts since 1996, causing at least $43 million
 in damages. He said that although resources were temporarily diverted due to
 the Sept. 11 attacks and subsequent anthrax cases, the counterterrorism
 division once again will be focusing on ELF and ALF, which the FBI labeled as
 primary domestic terrorism threats.
 While 10 out of 11 witnesses spoke in favor of increased regulation and
 support, a subpoenaed witness, former ELF spokesman Craig Rosebraugh, pleaded
 the Fifth Amendment against self-incrimination on all but a few questions.
 Rosebraugh, who was accompanied by his attorney, answered yes when asked if
 he was a U.S. citizen, but took the Fifth when asked if he agreed with the
 U.S. Constitution. When Rosebraugh was asked if he understood the Fifth
 Amendment, he again ''took the Fifth."
 After the hearing, Nethercutt, a Spokane Republican, said that if
 Rosebraugh doesn't believe in the establishment of the U.S. Constitution, he
 doesn't deserve the privilege of the Fifth Amendment.
 Rep. Jay Inslee, D-Wash., said the committee will look into whether
 Rosebraugh was properly permitted the privilege of the Fifth Amendment since
 he submitted a lengthy written statement beforehand.
 Rosebraugh also refused to comment on his written statement.
 ''It's so nice to have a witness who's so proud of his work that he refuses
 to testify about it," Inslee said.
 ELF members protested outside the building, holding up banners and handing
 out fliers. While the group obtained a permit for 75 people to demonstrate,
 Capitol police said there were considerably fewer there.

Load-Date: February 15, 2002


End of Document