WITNESS LIVES IN FEAR OF TERRORISTS … AFTER 6 YEARS OF LIFE IN HIDING IN; U.S., HE HAS GROWN DISILLUSIONED
St. Louis Post-Dispatch (Missouri)
May 26, 1991, SUNDAY, THREE STAR Edition


Copyright 1991 St. Louis Post-Dispatch, Inc.
Section: NEWS; Pg. 12A
Length: 364 words
Byline: The Associated Press
Body


WASHINGTON (AP) - Adnan Awad had it all: money, showgirls, cars. Then he fell in with a crowd of Palestinian terrorists in Baghdad, Iraq.  He escaped but now lives underground, cut off from his family and past, afraid for his life. U.S. officials hope his pain won't be for nothing, that the information he has given them will help put his former friends behind bars.  Awad sought asylum in the United States six years ago and wants to help.  But he's disillusioned with what he's not getting in return. ''I feel like hostage. I feel like I am not exist. I have no passport, no money.'' He was taken to Washington by the Justice Department earlier this month to prepare for his appearance in Greece as a star witness in next month's trial of a Palestinian accused of bombing a U.S. jetliner.  He also is meeting behind closed doors with congressional investigators to tell them what he knows about Iraqi support for terrorism and the organizations Iraq bankrolls.  Awad, 50, will testify at the trial of Mohammed Rashid, who is charged with planting a bomb on a Pan Am jetliner in 1982, killing a teen-ager and wounding 15 other people. Rashid was arrested at Athens airport in 1988 on a tip from U.S. authorities.  U.S. investigators believe the device was made by Abu Ibrahim, a master bombmaker whose small May 15 organization is believed to have attacked dozens of U.S. and Israeli targets worldwide.
Awad, who gets a small monthly stipend from the government, said he has moved several times around the country, once when it appeared that Iraqi-dispatched agents had entered the United States to look for him.  He said he would testify despite what he says is the United States' failure to grant him two wishes: an American passport and reward money for people who bring about the apprehension or prosecution of terrorists.  The State Department, which administers the anti-terrorism purse, says Awad arrived here before the $2 million program was enacted by Congress in 1988.  His lawyer said the Immigratio n and Naturalization Service was studying whether Awad could be granted citizenship under a provision for people who make ''an extraordinary contribution'' to U.S. security.

Load-Date: October 13, 1993


End of Document