Woman plans guilty plea in terrorism case
Charleston Daily Mail (West Virginia)
August 12, 2014, Tuesday


Copyright 2014 Charleston Newspapers
Section: WNATION; Pg. P11B
Length: 340 words
Byline: SADIE GURMAN, The Associated Press
Body


DENVER - A 19-year-old suburban Denver woman accused of trying to help a foreign terrorist organization plans to plead guilty in the case.
Federal documents filed Friday say an agreement has been reached in the case against Shannon Conley of Arvada, Colorado, who was arrested at Denver International Airport in April while boarding a flight she hoped would ultimately get her to Syria.
Details of the agreement were not part of the court filing, but Conley's public defender Robert Pepin asked to schedule a change of plea hearing. He did not immediately return calls seeking comment.
The details of such deals cannot be disclosed until a change of plea hearing, said Jeff Dorschner, a spokesman for the U.S. Attorney's Office in Denver.
FBI agents say Conley was intent on waging jihad in the Middle East, despite their repeated efforts to stop her.
In several overt meetings over eight months, Conley, a convert to Islam, told members of the FBI's Joint Terrorism Task Force that she was planning to travel overseas and marry a man she believed was a Tunisian fighting for the Islamic State of Iraq and the Levant, an al-Qaida splinter group. The militant group also known as ISIL or ISIS has recently overrun parts of Iraq and Syria.
She apparently met her suitor online, and authorities have said they are still investigating the man, identified in court documents only as Y.M. Conley said she planned to fly to Turkey and then travel to Syria to become a housewife and a nurse at the man's camp, providing medical services and training.
Even four days before her arrest, she continued to tell the agents there was nothing they could do to change her mind, the documents say.
FBI agents became aware of Conley's growing interest in extremism in November after she alarmed employees of a suburban Denver church by wandering around with a backpack and taking notes on the layout of the campus, according to the court documents. The church, Faith Bible Chapel in Arvada, was the scene of a 2007 shooting in which a man killed two missionary workers.

Load-Date: August 12, 2014


End of Document