Woman at the center of terror investigation had become more devout
St. Louis Post-Dispatch (Missouri)
December 6, 2015 Sunday
FINAL EDITION


Copyright 2015 St. Louis Post-Dispatch, Inc. All Rights Reserved
Section: NEWS; Pg. A4
Length: 725 words
Byline:  Associated Press  
Body


SAN BERNARDINO, Calif. • A change came over Tashfeen Malik two or three years ago.
She started dressing more conservatively, wearing a scarf that covered nearly all her face, and became more devout in her Muslim faith, according to some who knew her in Pakistan.
But her path from there to the bloody events of this past week - when she and her husband slaughtered 14 people in a commando-style shooting rampage - remains a mystery.
FBI officials, family lawyers and others said they know little about the 29-year-old housewife and new mother, apart from what came to light on Friday: that Malik had pledged allegiance to the Islamic State group on Facebook as she and her American-born husband, Syed Farook, 28, went on the rampage.
The turn in the investigation raised a host of questions, among them:
• If the couple were radicalized, when, where and how did it happen? Were they influenced by Islamist material online or direct contact with extremists?
• If it happened before Malik came to the U.S., did counterterrorism authorities miss any warning signs when they investigated her before approving her visa?
• Which of them was the driving force in the attack?
"Malik seems to be a very nebulous figure," said Natana DeLong-Bas, an assistant professor of theology at Boston College. She said the case should cause people to rethink some of their assumptions about extremism.
"We always seem to assume only a man would be capable of making a terrorist attack," DeLong-Bas said. "Because we know so little about Tashfeen Malik, it's possible she might have been the main organizer in this event and talked her husband into doing it."
Husband and wife were killed in a furious shootout with police hours after they armed themselves with assault rifles and opened fire on a gathering of Farook's colleagues from the San Bernardino County health department, where he worked as a restaurant inspector. The FBI said it is investigating the rampage as a terrorist attack.
RAID IN RIVERSIDE
Early Saturday, authorities with guns drawn raided a home next door to the house where Farook's family used to live in Riverside, California, breaking windows and using a cutting torch to get into the garage, neighbors said. The FBI would not say what investigators were looking for.
Hundreds of FBI employees are working the case, interviewing people, gleaning information off the Internet, conducting searches and analyzing evidence, bureau spokeswoman Laura Eimiller said.
U.S. officials said Farook had been in contact with extremists via social media, but one official said those contacts were not recent and did not involve any significant players on the FBI's radar.
FBI Director James Comey said Friday that there was no indication so far that the couple were part of a larger cell or directed by a foreign terrorist organization.
BORN IN CHICAGO
Farook was born in Chicago to Pakistani parents and raised in Southern California. Malik arrived in the U.S. in 2014 on a Pakistani passport and a fiancée visa but had spent extended periods of time in Saudi Arabia.
She started studying pharmacy at Bahauddin Zakariya University in the Pakistani city of Multan in 2012.
A maid who worked in the Multan home where Malik lived said that Malik initially wore a scarf that covered her head but not her face. A year before she got married, she began wearing a scarf that covered all but her nose and eyes, the maid said.
A relative of Malik's in Pakistan, Hifza Batool, reported hearing similar things from other family members about Malik, her step-niece.
"I recently heard it from relatives that she has become a religious person and she often tells people to live according to the teachings of Islam," said Batool, a teacher who lives in Karor Lal Esan, about 280 miles southwest of the Pakistani capital of Islamabad.
The Farook family attorneys, David Chesley and Mohammad Abuershaid, said none of his relatives had any indication either Farook or his wife held extremist views.
OBAMA ADDRESS
The White House says President Barack Obama will address the nation from the Oval Office at 7 p.m. St. Louis time on Sunday about the steps the government is taking to keep people safe after the attack in California. Obama will provide an update on the FBI investigation. He will talk about the nature of the threat of Islamic terrorism, how it has evolved, and how he plans to defeat it.

Graphic

 
 This undated combination of photos provided by the FBI, left, and the California Department of Motor Vehicles shows Tashfeen Malik, left, and Syed Farook. The husband and wife died in a fierce gunbattle with authorities several hours after their commando-style assault on a gathering of Farook's colleagues from San Bernardino, Calif., County's health department Wednesday, Dec. 2, 2015. (FBI, left, and California Department of Motor Vehicles via AP)  Hifza Batool, a relative of Tashfeen Malik, talks to The Associated Press at her home in the town of Karor Lal Esam, about 450 kilometers (280 miles) southwest of Islamabad, Pakistan, Saturday, Dec. 5, 2015. Batool told The AP on Saturday that other relatives have said that Malik, who was her step-niece, used to wear Western clothes but began wearing the hijab head covering or the all-covering burqa donned by the most conservative Muslim women about three years ago. (AP Photo/Asim Tanveer)  People walk through an alley in Karor Lal Esam, the hometown of California's female shooter Tashfeen Malik, about 450 kilometers (280 miles) southwest of Islamabad, Pakistan, Saturday, Dec. 5, 2015. The Pakistani woman Malik, who joined her U.S.-born husband in killing 14 people in a commando-style assault on his co-workers is now at the center of a massive FBI terrorism investigation. (AP Photo/Asim Tanveer)  Pakistani women walk through a market in Karor Lal Esam, the hometown of California's female shooter Tashfeen Malik, about 450 kilometers (280 miles) southwest of Islamabad, Pakistan, Saturday, Dec. 5, 2015. Malik, who joined her U.S.-born husband in killing 14 people in a commando-style assault on his co-workers is now at the center of a massive FBI terrorism investigation. (AP Photo/Asim Tanveer)  Chaplain Chuck Bender, right, prays with Michael Davila at a makeshift memorial honoring the victims of Wednesday's shooting rampage, Friday, Dec. 4, 2015, in San Bernardino, Calif. The FBI said Friday it is officially investigating the mass shooting in California as an act of terrorism, while a U.S. law enforcement official said the woman who carried out the attack with her husband had pledged allegiance to the Islamic State group and its leader on Facebook. (AP Photo/Jae C. Hong)  Hifza Batool, a relative of Tashfeen Malik, talks to The Associated Press at her home in the town of Karor Lal Esam, about 450 kilometers (280 miles) southwest of Islamabad, Pakistan, Saturday, Dec. 5, 2015. Batool told The AP on Saturday that other relatives have said that Malik, who was her step-niece, used to wear Western clothes but began wearing the hijab head covering or the all-covering burqa donned by the most conservative Muslim women about three years ago. (AP Photo/Asim Tanveer)  Kareema Abdul-Khabir, who teaches special needs students at an elementary school in Barstow, Calif., places some cards made by her students at a makeshift memorial honoring the victims of Wednesday's shooting rampage Friday, Dec. 4, 2015, in San Bernardino, Calif. The FBI said Friday it is officially investigating the mass shooting in California as an act of terrorism, while a U.S. law enforcement official said the woman who carried out the attack with her husband had pledged allegiance to the Islamic State group and its leader on Facebook. (AP Photo/Jae C. Hong)  FILE -In this June 18, 2015 file photo, FBI Director James Comey speaks at the Justice Department in Washington. The FBI said Friday it is officially investigating the mass shooting in California as an act of terrorism, while a U.S. law enforcement official said the woman who carried out the attack with her husband had pledged allegiance to the Islamic State group and its leader on Facebook. (AP Photo/Pablo Martinez Monsivais, File)  San Bernardino County Sheriff John McMahon talks to reporters during a news conference Friday, Dec. 4, 2015, in San Bernardino, Calif. The FBI said Friday it is officially investigating the mass shooting in California as an act of terrorism, while a U.S. law enforcement official said the woman who carried out the attack with her husband had pledged allegiance to the Islamic State group and its leader on Facebook. (AP Photo/Jae C. Hong)  Balloons adorn a makeshift memorial site honoring the victims of Wednesday's shooting rampage, Friday, Dec. 4, 2015, in San Bernardino, Calif. The FBI said Friday it is officially investigating the mass shooting in California as an act of terrorism, while a U.S. law enforcement official said the woman who carried out the attack with her husband had pledged allegiance to the Islamic State group and its leader on Facebook. (AP Photo/Jae C. Hong)  David Bowdich, center, assistant director of the FBI's Los Angeles office, talks to reporters during a news conference Friday, Dec. 4, 2015, in San Bernardino, Calif. The FBI said Friday it is officially investigating the mass shooting in California as an act of terrorism, while a U.S. law enforcement official said the woman who carried out the attack with her husband had pledged allegiance to the Islamic State group and its leader on Facebook. (AP Photo/Jae C. Hong)  David Bowdich, assistant director of the FBI's Los Angeles office, talks to reporters during a news conference Friday, Dec. 4, 2015, in San Bernardino, Calif. The FBI said Friday it is officially investigating the mass shooting in California as an act of terrorism, while a U.S. law enforcement official said the woman who carried out the attack with her husband had pledged allegiance to the Islamic State group and its leader on Facebook. (AP Photo/Jae C. Hong)  Kayla Gaskill, left, Gaskill's mother and Connie Pegler, right, pay respect at a makeshift memorial for the victims of Wednesday's shooting rampage, Friday, Dec. 4, 2015, in San Bernardino, Calif. Gaskill said her friend Daniel Kaufman was killed in the shooting. (AP Photo/Jae C. Hong)  Candles are placed at a makeshift memorial site honoring the victims of Wednesday's shooting rampage, Friday, Dec. 4, 2015, in San Bernardino, Calif. The FBI said Friday it is officially investigating the mass shooting in California as an act of terrorism, while a U.S. law enforcement official said the woman who carried out the attack with her husband had pledged allegiance to the Islamic State group and its leader on Facebook. (AP Photo/Jae C. Hong)  Members of the media crowd into the living room of an apartment in Redlands, Calif., shared by San Bernardino shooting rampage suspects Syed Farook and his wife, Tashfeen Malik, Friday, Dec. 4, 2015, after the building landlord invited media into the townhouse rented by the California attackers. (AP Photo/Chris Carlson)  This undated photo provided by the FBI shows Tashfeen Malik. Malik and her husband, Syed Farook, died in a fierce gunbattle with authorities several hours after their commando-style assault on a gathering of Farook's colleagues from San Bernardino, Calif., County's health department Wednesday, Dec. 2, 2015. (FBI via AP)  This undated photo provided by the California Department of Motor Vehicles shows Syed Rizwan Farook who has been named as the suspect in the San Bernardino, Calif., shootings. Farook communicated with individuals who were under FBI scrutiny in connection with a terrorism investigation. But the official said the contact was with "people who weren't significant players on our radar," dated back some time, and there was no immediate indication of any "surge" in communication ahead of the shooting. (California Department of Motor Vehicles via AP) 

Load-Date: December 7, 2015


End of Document