Word for Word/Disasters for Kids; Think of It as an Opportunity To Meet New Friends
 The New York Times
February 16, 2003 Sunday
 Late Edition - Final 


Copyright 2003 The New York Times Company
Section: Section 4; Column 1; Week in Review Desk; Pg. 7
Length: 916 words
Byline:  By TOM ZELLER 
Body


THE natural tendency, of course, is to shield children from even thinking about horrible events. But in a world that has become accustomed to the language of anthrax, biotoxins and suicide bombers, it's nearly impossible and perhaps unwise to keep anyone in the dark.
     The American government has been telling children about disasters since at least the 1950's, when it lent a hand to parents and teachers with Bert the Turtle, a cartoon character that taught children how to "duck and cover" in the event of a nuclear blast. And today, where better than the Internet for the government to offer children some straightforward advice about terrorism? 
 The Federal Emergency Management Agency has added "National Security Emergencies" (read: terrorism) to its catalog of online disaster lessons aimed at children (fema.gov/kids). A biological attack would wreak havoc much like a wildfire or tsunami, the logic goes, and the skills children need to cope in the aftermath are essentially the same.
What the site lacks in grace ("use small people figures," it says," to play out what is happening during your disaster"), it makes up for in honesty ("you don't have to be afraid, but its always a good idea to be aware of your surroundings"). Some excerpts from the governments disaster lessons follow.   TOM ZELLER

HEY, KIDS! -- FEMAs disaster site is M.C.d by a crab.

Welcome to FEMA for Kids! Im Herman, the spokescrab for the site. This site teaches you how to be prepared for disasters and how you can prevent disaster damage. You can also learn what causes disasters, play games, read stories and become Disaster Action Kid.

GETTING SERIOUS -- Although National Security Emergencies is the official category title, the word terrorism needs to be defined.

what is terrorism? Terrorism is the use of force or violence against people or property to create fear and to get publicity for political causes. Terrorists are criminals and when they are caught they are put on trial. Acts of terrorism include: threats of violence, assassinations, kidnappings, hijackings, bomb scares and bombings, and the use of chemical, biological and nuclear weapons.
Targets for terrorism include government buildings, large airports, big cities and national landmarks. Terrorists might also target large public gatherings, water and food supplies and utilities such as electric plants. Terrorists might also spread fear by sending explosives or chemical and biological agents through the mail.

To move on from there, the agency asks children to get an adults approval.

Terrorism is a scary thing. Before you go any further on this page, you need to have permission of an adult. Check with your parent or teacher (if you are at school) or another adult to make sure you have the O.K. to learn more.$; Do you have the O.K. to continue?

Choosing "No" sends young visitors back to the main disaster page, where they can choose from several natural disasters that dont require adult approval.

TERRORISM 101 -- The tools of the terrorist trade chemical, biological, radiological and nuclear weapons are described in detail, as are instructions for dealing with them. On nuclear and "dirty bombs" in detail:

Nuclear explosions can cause blinding light, intense heat, fires and radiation fallout. You may have heard the term dirty bomb, as a terrorist weapon. A dirty bomb is an explosive device that scatters radioactive material. You may have also heard the term suitcase bomb, which is a very small nuclear device about the size of a suitcase. If the U.S. government knows of a threat of nuclear or radiological attack, officials will warn residents and may advise people to take cover or evacuate. Taking shelter during a nuclear attack is absolutely necessary below ground is best. Stay there until officials say you can leave. Talk to your parents about the location of a possible shelter and have your parents talk to your school officials, too.

YOU CAN COUNT ON FEMA -- From the terrorism pages, the agency links to its general recommendations for coping with any kind of disaster, including some reassuring words at the outset.

Disasters can happen. They often happen quickly and without warning, and they can be scary for you and your parents. For example, you may have to leave your home and you may not be able to go to school. You may not be able to sleep in your own bed and things may be confusing for awhile.

This is followed by SIX important things to remember. They include:

TIP 1: Disasters dont last very long. Soon, things will be back to normal.

TIP 2: You can get a new routine if you can't go home for awhile. You will settle down into a new place and you will meet new friends.

A QUIZ -- In all cases, children can quiz themselves on what they've learned about disasters and how to prepare for them. Some sample questions (the answer to No. 3 is twice):

1. Choose the item that does NOT belong in your Disaster Supply Kit.

Television set
Canned goods
Flashlight
Sleeping bag
Stored water

2. What does the term nonperishable food mean?

It doesn't taste good. Its poisonous.
It doesn't have chocolate chips.
It can last a long time without being refrigerated.

3. How many times a year should you change the batteries in your smoke detector?

Never
Once
Twice

4. True or False: Only some families need to have a Disaster Supply Kit and Family Disaster Plan.

True
False

5. If you are in a disaster, what can you do to feel better?

Take a bath
Chew gum
Draw pictures, write about it, talk to your parents and help out with chores
Hide in bed

http://www.nytimes.com

Graphic

 
Drawings: One of These Things Is Not Like the Other -- The Federal Emergency Management Agencys Web site offers children a number of disasters to contemplate, including the unnatural disasters linked to terrorism. (Illustrations by FEMA.com) 

Load-Date: February 16, 2003


End of Document