WORKERS IN TURLEY PROTEST A MURDER:HUNDREDS OF THOUSANDS STOP WORK AFTER
The New York Times
July 24, 1980, Thursday, Late City Final Edition


Copyright 1980 The New York Times Company
Section: Section A; Page 7, Column 1; Foreign Desk
Length: 361 words
Dateline: UNION LEADER IS KILLED
Body


PREMIER SEEKING POWERS
ANKARA, Turkey, July 23 - Hundreds of thousands of workers stopped work today in major cities to protest the murder yesterday of a leftist labor leader.
The Istanbul headquarters of the Confederation of Revolutionary Labor Unions said a million workers, including civil servants, had joined in denouncing the assassination of Kemal Turkler, leader of the Metalworkers Union.
A right-wing terrorist group, the Turkish Revenge Brigade, called newspapers claiming responsibility for the murder.  Prime Minister Suleyman Demirel asked Parliament for authority to combat terrorism and said Communism was behind the troubles.  ''We won't give up the country to a handful of traitors,'' he said, calling for a law of emergency powers, the establishment of special courts and increased authority for the martial-law command.
AN-AJoint Session of Parliament
He spoke during a debate in a joint session of Parliament called to discuss the terror, which has taken 2,000 lives this year.  Former Prime Minister Bulent Ecevit told Parliament that his Republican People's Party rejected the call for additional powers and said the Government had given evidence of cooperation with rightwing extremists. The Interior Minister resigned this week when accused of showing bias in favor of right-wing terrorists.
Mr. Ecevit said the only way to face the crisis was through ''a broadly-based government of restoration'' that would include the main parties. The Prime Minister turned down the proposal. The two leaders are scheduled to meet tomorrow with the aim of working out some kind of cooperation in the fight against terrorism.
The martial-law authorities threatened legal proceedings against workers who joined in today's protest. Some 14,000 municipal workers did not go to their jobs here and outside buses were brought in to relieve some of the congestion. By the end of the day, the municipal workers went back to work after they had been threatened with loss of jobs.
In Istanbul more than 15,000 municipal employees joined the protest, as did thousands of municipal workers throughout the country. Bank employees also joined in, along with the factory workers.


End of Document