World datelines
Deseret Morning News (Salt Lake City)
July 4, 2008 Friday


Copyright 2008 The Deseret News Publishing Co.
Length: 468 words
Byline: Compiled from Deseret News wire services
Body


Britain: 'Rendition' assurance
LONDON -- The United States has told Britain it has found no further "extraordinary rendition" flights that passed through British territory following checks of hundreds of flights, Foreign Secretary David Miliband said Thursday.
Human rights campaigners rejected the new assurances and accused the U.S. and Britain of a trans-Atlantic cover-up over rendition -- the policy of transferring foreign terrorism suspects to third countries without court approval.
Cyprus: EU treaty OK'd
NICOSIA -- The Cypriot parliament approved the European Union treaty Thursday, making Cyprus the 20th EU member to ratify the document aimed at streamlining decision-making in the bloc.
All 27 EU members must approve the so-called Lisbon Treaty before it can take effect. Its future was thrown into doubt, however, after Ireland rejected the treaty in a June 12 referendum.
Germany: eBay baby returned
MEMMINGEN -- A baby boy removed from his parents' custody after they offered to sell him on eBay for just a euro -- $1.59 -- as a joke is back at home, a prosecutor said Thursday.
"The child has been returned to his parents," prosecutor Johannes Kreuzpointer told The Associated Press.
The parents maintained that the posting was just a joke gone awry. Investigators agreed, dropping their probe into possible child trafficking.
Mongolia: Calm after protests
ULAN BATOR -- Military vehicles withdrew from streets as life in Mongolia's capital largely returned to normal Thursday just days after rioting sparked by an electoral dispute left five people dead.
As smoke hung in the air over charred buildings, authorities were questioning more than 700 people detained in the violence -- the worst since the landlocked Asian nation shook off communism 18 years ago.
Sweden: Compensation OK'd
STOCKHOLM -- Sweden will pay 3 million kronor ($502,000) in compensation to an exonerated Egyptian terrorism suspect who was handed over to CIA agents and deported in 2001, the government said Thursday.
Chancellor of Justice Goran Lambertz said the Swedish state reached a settlement with Muhammed Alzery's lawyers on compensating him for circumstances of his deportation.
Vatican City: Miracle approved
VATICAN CITY -- Pope Benedict XVI on Thursday approved a miracle attributed to the intercession of a 19th century Belgian priest who ministered to leprosy patients in Hawaii -- opening the way for him to be declared a saint.
Benedict declared that a Honolulu woman's recovery in 1999 from terminal lung cancer was the miracle needed for canonization of the Rev. Damien de Veuster. The miracle was attributed to the intercession of the late priest, to whom the woman, Audrey Toguchi, had prayed.
The approval means that Father Damien, beatified by Pope John Paul II in 1995, will be canonized at a date still to be set.

Load-Date: July 4, 2008


End of Document