World Briefs: Thousands demonstrate in Taiwan against China
St. Louis Post-Dispatch (Missouri)
October 21, 2018 Sunday
FINAL EDITION


Copyright 2018 St. Louis Post-Dispatch, Inc. All Rights Reserved
Section: NEWS; Pg. A16
Length: 844 words
Byline:  From news services 
Body


Thousands demonstrate in Taiwan against China
Thousands of pro-independence demonstrators gathered in Taiwan's capital on Saturday to express their disapproval of China's stance toward their island.
China cut off contact with Taiwanese President Tsai Ing-wen's government shortly after her inauguration in 2016 and has been ratcheting up diplomatic, economic and military pressure on Taiwan in a bid to compel Tsai to agree to Beijing's insistence that the self-governing island is a part of China.
In an Oct. 10 National Day address, Tsai called on China not to be a "source of conflict" and pledged to boost Taiwan's defenses against Beijing's military threats. China and Taiwan separated in 1949, but China considers the island part of its territory.
55 killed in ‘worrisome' bout of violence in Nigeria - Nigeria's government says 55 people have been killed in the latest eruption of communal violence in north-central Kaduna state.
A spokesman says President Muhammadu Buhari condemns the fighting that led to Thursday's killings in Kasuwan Magani and that "frequent resort to bloodshed by Nigerians over misunderstandings that can be resolved peacefully is worrisome."
Kaduna's governor said that more than 20 people had been arrested. Central Nigeria has seen bouts of communal violence that some blame on ethnic and religious differences.
Napoleon's army defeated again - Hundreds of history buffs have re-enacted the 19th-century Battle of Leipzig, which saw the defeat of Napoleon I's army by combined forces from Prussia, Austria, Russia and Sweden.
Enthusiasts from across Europe, dressed in period costumes, fired muskets and cannons at each other Saturday as spectators looked on near Germany's city of Leipzig.
The Battle of Leipzig took place Oct. 16-19, 1813. It is considered one of the bloodiest battles in European history.
Terrorism charges against Sri Lankan dropped - The family of a Sri Lankan man living in Australia says terrorism charges against him have been dropped.
Kamer Nizamdeen, an employee at the University of New South Wales, had been under investigation for terrorism since he was arrested by Australian authorities in August. Police said they found in his notebook plans to carry out terrorist acts in Sydney.
Nizamdeen's family, which maintains that the handwriting in the notebook isn't his, said the charges were dropped on Friday. Nizamdeen, 25, was kept in solitary confinement for weeks before he was released on bail last month.
Nizamdeen's attorney said his client would seek legal costs and other compensation from Australian police.
Islamic State frees 6 hostages in exchange with Syria - Islamic State members have released two women and four children they had been holding since July in the first part of an exchange with the Syrian government that will set free dozens of women related to members of the extremist group, activists said.
The women and children were among 30 people kidnapped by the group in the southern province of Sweida on July 25 during a raid that left at least 216 people dead.
The rare attacks in Sweida province, populated mainly by Syria's minority Druze, came amid a government offensive elsewhere in the country's south.
Britain-based Syrian Observatory for Human Rights said the women and children, who were released early Saturday, were the first batch of the exchange. The Observatory said the government in return will release 60 women held by authorities and pay a $27 million ransom.
2 tropical storms draw closer to Mexico - Two tropical storms are swirling in the Pacific Ocean off Mexico, and one is forecast to become a hurricane and approach the country's west coast this week.
Tropical Storm Willa is the 21st named storm of the eastern Pacific hurricane season. It was about 305 miles southwest of the port city of Manzanillo on Saturday. The U.S. National Hurricane Center said it was likely to remain well off the coast through Wednesday, but after that it could turn toward land.
Tropical Storm Vicente formed Friday off the coast of the southern state of Chiapas. It was about 170 miles southeast of Salina Cruz. The center said it could produce 3 to 6 inches of rain along Mexico's southern Pacific coast and parts of Guatemala.
Kidnappers free Tanzanian billionaire - A Tanzanian billionaire industrialist who was abducted Oct. 11 was released unharmed, as police said they're looking for the kidnappers.
Mohammed Dewji, 43, listed by Forbes as Africa's youngest billionaire with a net worth of $1.5 billion, was dropped off in Dar es Salaam, Tanzania's main city, by his kidnappers, police Inspector General Simon Sirro said Saturday.
The Mo Dewji Foundation, a charity established by the billionaire, announced his release early Saturday. In a Twitter post, it quoted Dewji thanking "the authorities of Tanzania, including the police force for working for my safe return."
Dewji owns MeTL Group, a conglomerate operating in several African countries. There was no publicly announced demand for ransom; Dewji's family offered almost $500,000 as a reward for information that led to his rescue.

Graphic

 
 Protesters with  "Taiwan independence flags" attend a rally in Taipei, Taiwan, Saturday, Oct. 20, 2018. Thousands of pro-independence demonstrators gathered in Taiwan's capital on Saturday to express their disapproval with China's stance toward their island. (AP Photo/Chiang Ying-ying) 

Load-Date: October 22, 2018


End of Document