WORLDWIDE, SEPARATIST GROUPS ARE REJECTING USE OF TERRORISM AS TOOL
St. Louis Post-Dispatch (Missouri)
October 28, 2001 Sunday Three Star Edition


Copyright 2001 St. Louis Post-Dispatch, Inc.
Section: NEWS; Pg. A2
Length: 766 words
Byline: Niko Price The Associated Press
Dateline: WASHINGTON
Body


Ever since Sept. 11, rebel groups, separatist organizations and militant political movements in various parts of the world have taken pains to distance themselves from anything resembling terrorism.
The Irish Republican Army has begun to turn over its arms, Chechen rebels are starting peace talks with Russia and Yasser Arafat ordered Palestinian groups to halt suicide attacks.
"Those who are using the killing of civilians to attract attention are maybe rethinking their strategy," said Philip C. Wilcox Jr., president of Foundation for Middle East Peace in Washington.
Some armed groups may be trying to avoid American wrath after seeing the airstrikes in Afghanistan, analysts say. Others could be trying to adapt to a new international reality in which terrorism is condemned even more harshly than it had been. And others are thinking hard about their tactics.
"Even terrorists tend to have some concept of limits on what they will do," said Loren Thompson, a defense analyst at the Washington-based Le xington Institute. "For many nationalists, what al-Qaida did was just too much, too destructive, to possibly claim the moral high ground."
In a development the terrorists surely never intended, the aftermath of the attacks appears to be pushing some long-festering conflicts toward resolution.
On Tuesday, the Irish Republican Army said it had begun to lay down its arms after decades of battling British soldiers and bombing commercial centers, including devastating explosions in the capital's financial district, known as the City of London. Supporters conceded that the terrorist attacks in the United States played a role.
"The IRA couldn't dream of mounting another bomb spectacular against the City of London," a senior negotiator for the IRA-linked Sinn Fein party said on condition of anonymity. "If it ever was an option, it no longer could be after Sept. 11."
Russian President Vladimir Putin saw Sept. 11 as an opportunity to put the lingering war in Chechnya behind him. In a speech outlining Russia's response, he invited the rebels - with whom he had refused to negotiate since the conflict rekindled in 1999 - to come to the table.
Analysts say Putin hopes the new international climate will help pressure the rebels to accept a resolution he considers favorable.
The pro-independence rebels, who had already indicated their willingness to negotiate, accepted immediately, and said Wednesday that talks would begin within 10 days. Although prospects for real peace remain distant, the events since Sept. 11 represent the best hope in years.
Even the conflict between Israel and the Palestinians, which has been resistant to almost every world event for decades, has been affected by the attacks.
After Sept. 11, Palestinian leader Yasser Arafat quickly declared a cease-fire with Israel, and his police used guns, clubs and tear gas to battle Palestinians demonstrating in favor of Osama bin Laden.
Although militant groups like Hamas and Islamic Jihad didn't sign onto the cease-fire, their attacks against Israeli targets have fallen off noticeably, and neither group has carried out a single suicide bombing since Sept. 11.
"Hamas and Islamic Jihad have become more sensitive to trying to avoid the kind of activities which might label them more as being terrorists," said Ghassan Khatib, a Palestinian political analyst.
When the Popular Front for the Liberation of Palestine claimed responsibility for the killing Oct. 17 of ultranationalist Israeli Tourism Minister Rehavam Zeevi, Arafat's officers arrested 20 members of the group, although Israel has said they haven't arrested those responsible for the killing.
Nearby in Lebanon, the guerrilla group Hezbollah - which has been accused of links to al-Qaida - condemned the attacks Sept. 11 and dramatically cut back on attacking Israeli forces. Hezbollah leaders deny that the two events are related.
"Hezbollah does not accept the killing of innocent civilians," said Abdullah Kassir, one of nine Hezbollah legislators in the Lebanese parliament.
Most armed groups from Mexico to Manila have taken pains to condemn the terrorist attacks, with some even calling the U.S. bombing of Afghanistan justified.
Of course, many rebel struggles - perhaps most - continue unabated, seemingly oblivious to the world's new focus on terrorism.
Wilcox said any general shift away from terrorism in response to the Sept. 11 attacks will most likely be temporary, because there will always be conflicts and there will always be evil people.
"Terrorism has been an evil of society since the beginning of time," he said. "There will always be terrorism."

Graphic

 
PHOTO; Photo by AGENCE FRANCE-PRESSE - A Protestant young man and child climb onto a railing this past week in north Belfast, Northern Ireland, in front of a large Loyalist mural painted on the side of a building. The Irish Republican Army has begun decommissioning weapons in an effort to further peace.

Load-Date: October 28, 2001


End of Document