World can fight warming, terrorism at the same time
USA TODAY
December 1, 2015 Tuesday
FIRST EDITION


Copyright 2015 Gannett Company, Inc. All Rights Reserved
Section: NEWS; Pg. 7A
Length: 519 words
Body


Opponents of meaningful action to combat man-made climate change have been shifting their arguments like a weather vane on a windy rooftop.
First, the foot-draggers fought the science. But that became harder and harder to sustain amid the mounting scientific consensus that greenhouse gas emissions from human activity are warming the globe -- and the mounting evidence of melting glaciers, rising sea levels, and more extreme floods and droughts. This year is on track to be the warmest since modern record-keeping began.
With the science becoming more conclusive, the opponents turned to the argument that U.S. action on emissions was pointless in the absence of similar commitments by other nations. But on Monday, more than 100 world leaders began to arrive in Paris for talks aimed at staving off the most destructive effects of global warming. Notably, the leaders of the two largest carbon polluters, smog-choked China and the United States, sat side by side and pledged cooperation in dealing with climate change.
Now, deprived of the "U.S. can't act alone" argument, the opponents have taken a new tack: It's crazy to focus on the long-term threat from climate change when we should be concentrating on the more immediate threat from radical Islamic terrorism. After President Obama said the Paris summit would be a rebuke to terrorists, former New York mayor Rudy Giuliani said he had never "heard anything more absurd from a president." Republican presidential front-runner Donald Trump, speaking Monday on MSNBC, called Obama's remarks about the threat posed by global warming "one of the dumbest things I've ever seen."
Actually, what's dumb is the which-threat-is-greater debate. Radical jihad and global warming are different threats requiring different responses over different time periods. One is a battle against a warped ideology, the other an enormous economic and scientific problem. The world  is capable of dealing with more than one challenge at a time.
To have postponed or canceled the climate talks in the wake of the Nov. 13 attacks that left 130 people dead in Paris would have been a huge victory for the terrorists. Indeed, the convergence of world leaders in France is a powerful statement that the world will not be cowed by acts of barbarism. As Obama put it Monday, "What greater rejection of those who would tear down our world than marshaling our best efforts to save it."
No one, of course, is expecting the Paris talks alone to save the planet, or even to hold warming below the target of 2 degrees Celsius (3.6 degrees Fahrenheit) above pre-industrial levels. At best, the pledges to reduce emissions will bend the temperature curve in ways that  take some worst-case scenarios off the table.
Regardless of the specific agreements that emerge during the next two weeks, the Paris talks represent an example of the civilized world pulling together to fight a common threat to humanity. That's a valuable exercise in its own right, one that's applicable to more than a single problem and one that will be important to generations long after the Islamic State terrorist group is crushed. 

Graphic

 
photo Evan Vucci, AP

Load-Date: December 1, 2015


End of Document