World briefs
St. Louis Post-Dispatch (Missouri)
June 15, 2014 Sunday
ONLINE EDITION


Copyright 2014 St. Louis Post-Dispatch, Inc. All Rights Reserved
Section: NEWS; Pg. A14
Length: 768 words
Byline:  From news services 
Body


Iran offers to aid Iraq - with U.S.
Iranian President Hassan Rouhani said Saturday that his government was prepared to assist Iraq in its fight against al-Qaida-inspired militants and did not rule out cooperating with the United States against the new wave of extremism in Iraq. "Whenever the United States makes a move on the ISIS, then we can think about cooperation with them in Iraq," Rouhani said, referring to the Islamic State of Iraq and Syria.
Rouhani delivered his remarks at a news conference marking the first anniversary of his surprising and resounding election victory last June. It was only the second time he has taken questions from foreign journalists in Tehran since assuming office last August. Since then, the Islamic republic has made progress toward ending its international isolation.
Airstrikes kill 100 militants in Pakistan • Pakistani intelligence officials say that airstrikes overnight in the northwestern tribal regions bordering Afghanistan have killed as many as 100 militants. Two intelligence officials said Sunday that the airstrikes by the Pakistani military had targeted eight militant hideouts in the North Waziristan tribal area.
Egypt to try 13 men in sexual assaults • Egypt's top prosecutor referred 13 men to trial for attempted rape and assault of women during public rallies in Cairo's iconic Tahrir Square, the first implementation of tough new penalties against rampant sexual violence, the state news agency reported. The speedy trial reflects a government push to address the issue, less than a week after the swearing in of Egypt's newly elected President Abdel-Fattah el-Sissi.
Italy rescues 300 migrants at sea • The Italian coast guard and navy have rescued more than 300 migrants whose boats ran into trouble in the Mediterranean Sea and recovered the bodies of 10 migrants whose dinghy had overturned. Naval official Salvatore Scimone said 39 survivors on Saturday had grabbed onto the dinghy until rescuers plucked them to safety. An undetermined number of others may be missing in the sea north of Libya. In a separate rescue, three Italian ships took aboard 281 migrants who said they were Syrian and whose boat ran into problems. They were taken to the Italian mainland.
Israel fears students were kidnapped • Israeli Prime Minister Benjamin Netanyahu said Saturday that three teenage students missing in the West Bank had been "kidnapped by a terrorist organization," and he said Israel would hold the Palestinian government accountable.
Netanyahu's comments came as Israeli forces deployed more soldiers and intelligence agents to the West Bank on Saturday in an intensive search for the teens, all students at a religious school known as a yeshiva. One of them, Naftali Frenkel, 16, is a dual Israeli-American citizen. Frenkel and the other teens, ages 16 and 19, disappeared Thursday night outside the city of Hebron.
France deports terrorism suspect • France has used new anti-terrorism measures to deport a Tunisian suspected of recruiting young people for jihad in Syria, the Interior Ministry said Saturday. The suspect, 28, is accused of playing a "central role" in recruiting in the Grenoble area. His deportation is the second under an anti-terrorism plan presented in April, which allows for the summary deportation of foreign nationals suspected of radicalizing local youth. An Algerian, 37, was deported to his country last month.
Brazil investigates alleged rape of American • Police are investigating the alleged rape of an American woman visiting the Brazilian World Cup host city of Cuiaba. The woman, 24, told them she was attacked Friday night after the Chile-Australia match. Police say she was treated at a hospital and is now in the care of representatives of the U.S. Embassy.
Talks to resume in mining dispute in Brazil • A two-day standoff with Indians who had blocked an entrance to a mining project in the Amazon where 50 workers were holed up has ended peacefully. The Vale SA mining company said Saturday night that the 400 Indians had been blocking the main entrance to its Onca Puma nickel mine in Para state in northern Brazil. Negotiations over the Indians' demands will resume on Monday, the company said.
Thailand lifts curfew • The generals who seized power in Thailand disrupted one of the country's most lucrative industries - the go-go bars that were forced to close early because of a curfew. Now the junta has lifted the curfew, giving a green light for Bangkok's red-light districts and other evening activities to roar back to life. For the first time in a month, Saturday night freedom returned to the Thai capital.

Graphic

 
 ASSOCIATED PRESS PHOTO - British soldiers escort Queen Elizabeth II in a horse-drawn carriage during the Trooping the Colour parade in central London on Saturday. The annual ceremony, which now marks the monarch's official birthday, originated from traditional preparations for battle, when flags were carried, or "trooped," down the rank for soldiers to see.   

Load-Date: June 15, 2014


End of Document