World Updates; Netherlands forms terrorism reinsurer
Business Insurance
August 11, 2003, Monday


Copyright 2003 Crain Communications Inc.
Section: Pg. 15
Length: 367 words
Body


Dutch insurers and the country's government have set up a reinsurer of last resort to cover terrorism risks in the Netherlands. The new company, Netherlands Reinsurance Co. for Losses from Terrorism, will cover losses above an industrywide primary insurance limit of 1 billion euros ($1.12 billion) for 2003. Dutch insurers have informed buyers that the reinsurance coverage will take effect Aug. 15. The reinsurance pool, which has capacity of 1 billion euros, is funded by Dutch insurers, the government and reinsurers.
U.K. insurers, brokers set renewal notice rule
The Assn. of British Insurers and the British Insurance Brokers Assn. have published a statement of good practice for renewal notification that will take effect on Nov. 1. The standard calls on insurers to notify brokers of changes to liability coverage renewal terms at least 21 days prior to the renewal date. Brokers, in turn, must pass that information on to buyers ''as soon as possible.'' Under the terms of the new standards, liability insurers would be expected to extend existing coverage if they fail to notify the broker of a nonrenewal within the 21-day notice period.
Swiss Re, Mitsui swap cat risks
Swiss Reinsurance Co. and Mitsui Sumitomo Insurance Co. have agreed to a $100 million catastrophe risk-swap. Under the terms of the deal, Swiss Re will cover a $100 million layer of Mitsui Sumitomo's Japanese typhoon exposure, while the Japanese insurer will bear a $100 million layer of Swiss Re's North Atlantic hurricane and European windstorm risk, explained Juerg Stoll, managing director of Swiss Re's financial services unit in Zurich.
London's Brit exits direct aviation
London-based Brit Insurance Holdings P.L.C. has stopped underwriting direct aviation risks. Brit is ceasing underwriting direct lines, including general aviation and product risks, that were forecast to generate aggregate premiums of 60 million ($96.5 million) in 2003, Brit said in a statement. About 22 million ($35.4 million) of that premium has already been written, the company added, and the account is expected to return a profit for 2003. The company will continue to write aviation reinsurance, aviation war risk and space coverage, it said.

Load-Date: August 14, 2003


End of Document