World dateline briefs
Deseret Morning News (Salt Lake City)
October 6, 2010 Wednesday


Copyright 2010 The Deseret News Publishing Co.
Length: 599 words
Body


Cuba: U.S. cooperation HAVANA ? Raul Castro says the U.S. has ignored Cuban overtures to cooperate on counterterrorism. Cuba decided Wednesday to make Oct. 6 its annual "Victims of State Terrorism Day." 
In a speech, Castro said the island offered 2001 and 2002 proposals for "bilateral cooperation to fight against terrorism." It repeated the offer last year. The U.S. made no reply, said Castro, who accused Washington of harboring Luis Posada Carriles, accused of involvement in 1990s Cuban hotel attacks and in the bombing of a Cuban jetliner. Castro said his country urges President Barack Obama to "abide by his commitment to fight terrorism and act with determination and without double standards against those who, from U.S. territory, have perpetrated and continue to perpetrate terrorist acts against Cuba." England: Poem LONDON ? The New Statesman says it's publishing a previously unseen poem by Ted Hughes that details the night his estranged wife, Sylvia Plath, killed herself. Hughes, a Briton, and Plath, an American, are considered among the 20th century's greatest poets. Their stormy relationship has been the focus of decades of critical attention. Plath earned a cult following through the novel "The Bell Jar," whose descriptions of a suicidal young woman foreshadowed her own death, which followed only a month after its publication in 1963. Italy: Organized crime ROME ? Italy is sending soldiers to a southern city to bolster protection for prosecutors threatened by mobsters from the 'ndrangheta, the powerful organized crime group that has been hit by hundreds of arrests and shaken by turncoats, authorities said Wednesday. Reggio Calabria's prefect, Luigi Varratta, told reporters after a special meeting of top security officials in the Calabrian capital that the soldiers would be posted around the clock outside the city's courthouse and offices where the prosecutors work. Extra contingents of paramilitary Carabinieri and state police office also were being deployed, starting Wednesday, Varratta's office said. "If the army's men helps us to free up some police" for investigations, the strategy would be useful, Reggio's prosecutor general, Salvatore Di Lando, said outside the courthouse. Israel: Peace talks RAMALLAH, West Bank ? Israel's prime minister has been sounding out key Cabinet members on extending a freeze on new construction in West Bank settlements in hopes of keeping peace talks with the Palestinians alive, but he is encountering stiff resistance, Israeli officials said Wednesday. In Ramallah, key members of the Palestinian leadership ? in an increasingly tense waiting mode ? expressed optimism that an extension nonetheless was imminent. The future of President Barack Obama's ambitious Mideast peace effort remained uncertain Wednesday as the U.S. pressed ahead with efforts to broker a compromise over the settlement issue, which has threatened to derail negotiations just a month after they were launched at the White House. Israel's normally talkative leadership has been almost completely silent in recent days as Prime Minister Benjamin Netanyahu wrestled with what appeared to be significant U.S. pressure to agree to some sort of extension of the construction slowdown ? which was in effect 10 months and expired on Sept. 26, just weeks after the resumption of peace talks. The Palestinians have threatened to walk out of the talks if Israel refuses to reinstate it ? and another deadline of sorts has emerged with Friday's planned summit of the 22-nation Arab League, where the Palestinians expect support for whatever they decide. 

Load-Date: October 7, 2010


End of Document