World Briefs: British official resigns, calls for new Brexit vote
St. Louis Post-Dispatch (Missouri)
November 10, 2018 Saturday
FINAL EDITION


Copyright 2018 St. Louis Post-Dispatch, Inc. All Rights Reserved
Section: NEWS; Pg. A7
Length: 601 words
Byline:  From news services 
Body


Stabbings in Australia linked to terrorism; suspect killed
A knife-wielding man stabbed three people, one fatally, in Australia's second-largest city on Friday in an attack police linked to terrorism.
The attack during the afternoon rush hour brought central Melbourne to a standstill. Police said the man got out of a pickup truck, which then caught fire, and attacked three bystanders with a knife. He also attempted to attack police before being shot in the chest by an officer.
The suspect died later at a hospital. One of the victims also died, while the two others were hospitalized.
Police said the attacker's vehicle contained gas cylinders in the back. The Victoria state police commissioner said the suspect, who was originally from Somalia, was known to police and the incident was being treated as terrorism.
3 cheetah cubs make their debut in German zoo - Three cheetah cubs have made their public debut at a zoo in the German city of Muenster, just over a month after they were born.
Mother Isantya kept a close watch on the three female cubs as they took their first steps in their outside enclosure on Friday.
The cubs were born on Oct. 4. They are the first offspring of Isantya, who came to Muenster from England last year.
Dutch court convicts 34 for blocking anti-racism protesters - A court in the Netherlands convicted 34 people Friday for blocking a highway to prevent anti-racism demonstrators from protesting at a parade featuring the Dutch version of Santa Claus and his helpers, called Black Pete.
Black Pete is often played by white people with their faces daubed in dark makeup. He has been at the center of debate for years between those who see him as a traditional children's character and opponents who decry him as a racist stereotype.
Those convicted were ordered to do unpaid community work.
Austrian ex-officer suspected of spying for Russia for decades - Austria's government said Friday that a retired colonel in the country's military is suspected of having spied for Russia for decades, a claim dismissed by Moscow.
The 70-year-old man from Salzburg, who wasn't named, allegedly provided a Russian intelligence agency with information about Austria's military, officials said. Prosecutors declined to say whether the man was in custody.
"According to our information this activity may have begun in the 1990s and continued until the year 2018," Austrian Chancellor Sebastian Kurz said. "That means there's a case of espionage here."
Russian Foreign Minister Sergey Lavrov accused Austria of "demanding an explanation over an issue we know nothing about."
British official resigns, calls for new Brexit vote - An official in the British government stepped down Friday to protest Prime Minister Theresa May's Brexit plan and is backing calls for a second referendum on whether the country should leave the European Union.
Jo Johnson, younger brother of former Foreign Secretary Boris Johnson, said the withdrawal agreement being discussed by EU and British leaders would greatly weaken Britain.
Jo Johnson's resignation, and his call for a fresh referendum, further complicates matters for May as she tries to strike a deal with EU leaders.
Ryanair jet seized by France just before takeoff - Storms, strikes, computer failures - you can now add "your plane has been seized by the government" to the list of things that can delay your flight.
In France, 149 passengers were preparing to take off for London on Thursday when French authorities ordered their Ryanair Boeing 737 impounded.
The multimillion dollar jet was released Friday after Ryanair paid a bill of 525,000 euros ($610,000).

Load-Date: November 11, 2018


End of Document