World Briefs: UN says Colombia's coca production surges to record high
St. Louis Post-Dispatch (Missouri)
September 20, 2018 Thursday
FINAL EDITION


Copyright 2018 St. Louis Post-Dispatch, Inc. All Rights Reserved
Section: NEWS; Pg. A14
Length: 736 words
Byline:  From news services 
Body


Denmark bank eyed as laundering hub
The chief executive of Danske, Denmark's largest bank, resigned Wednesday after a yearlong internal investigation into money laundering found $233 billion in suspicious transactions moving through the bank's tiny branch in Estonia.
The scandal has rocked Denmark as suspicions grew that Danske had become a hub for Russian money laundering. The eye-popping figure, which was released in a report Wednesday, could make the case one of the biggest money-laundering cases in history.
The bank could face fines and investigations across the globe. Thomas F. Borgen, the chief executive, said in a statement that "it is clear that Danske Bank has failed to live up to its responsibility."
Coca cultivation at record high in Colombia - A United Nations report said Wednesday that cultivation of the plant used to make cocaine has reached a record high in Colombia, adding pressure on President Iván Duque to resume an aerial spraying program suspended over health concerns.
Annual data released by the U.N. indicates Colombian coca cultivation increased 17 percent in 2017.
Colombia is a top U.S. ally in Latin America, but the boom in coca production has tested relations between the two nations. President Donald Trump recently threatened to decertify Colombia as a partner in the war on drugs if it failed to reverse course.
Duque, when he took office last month, identified the coca surge as a national security risk.
Al-Shabab extremists reported dead in airstrike - Several senior officials with the al-Shabab extremist group have been killed or wounded in an airstrike in southern Somalia, Somali intelligence officials said Wednesday, while the al-Qaida-linked group and a resident said children were among the dead.
The intelligence officials said the overnight airstrike hit a training school and hospital in the village of Sakow. They said those targeted include longtime commander Hassan Yaqub.
It was not clear who carried out the strike or how many people died.
Pakistan's ex-prime minister freed - Pakistan's former prime minister, Nawaz Sharif, his daughter and son-in-law were released from prison Wednesday after a court suspended their sentences and granted them bail pending appeals hearings.
The Islamabad High Court made the decision after the Sharifs petitioned to appeal their sentences, which were handed down by an anti-graft tribunal earlier this year.
The development is the latest twist in a series of scandals involving the former prime minister, beginning with his ouster from office last year, to several corruption cases and trials he still faces.
France to create museum to honor victims of terrorism - French President Emmanuel Macron has pledged to create a memorial museum to honor the victims of terrorism.
Macron, speaking Wednesday at a ceremony organized by victims' associations, said a committee will immediately start on the project.
Macron also announced more financial aid to survivors and relatives of terror attacks, especially to allow them to pay for travel and legal expenses when attending a trial abroad.
Officials from Russia, Israel to meet over downed plane - Russian President Vladimir Putin has accepted Israel's offer to share detailed information on the Israeli airstrike in Syria that led to the downing of a Russian reconnaissance plane, the Kremlin said Wednesday.
Syrian forces mistook the Russian Il-20 for Israeli aircraft, killing all 15 people aboard Monday night. Russia's Defense Ministry blamed the plane's loss on Israel, but Putin sought to defuse tension, pointing at "a chain of tragic accidental circumstances."
Israeli Prime Minister Benjamin Netanyahu called Putin on Tuesday to express sorrow over the death of the plane's crew and blamed Syria. Israel's air force chief is scheduled to arrive in Moscow on Thursday.
Woman mauled by shark in Australia - A woman was in critical condition Thursday after she was mauled by a shark on Australia's Great Barrier Reef, officials said.
The 46-year-old tourist from Tasmania state was swimming Wednesday from a yacht in Cid Harbor off the Queensland state coast when she was attacked by a shark that mauled an upper thigh, ambulance spokeswoman Tracey Eastwick said.
Dr. John Hadok of Mackay Base Hospital happened to be on a nearby yacht and helped slow the bleeding, Eastwick said.
The hospital reported the woman remained in critical condition after undergoing surgery Wednesday night.

Load-Date: September 21, 2018


End of Document