World & nation in 60 seconds The world The nation
Chicago Daily Herald
September 21, 2009 Monday
L2 Edition


Copyright 2009 Paddock Publications, Inc.
Section: NEWS; Pg. 2
Length: 657 words
Body


U.S. copter crashes in Iraq:
BAGHDAD — A Black Hawk helicopter crashed at a major American air base in Iraq, killing one U.S. service member and injuring 12 others, the military said Sunday. The UH-60 Black Hawk went down Saturday night at the Balad Air Base, about 50 miles north of Baghdad, the military said in a statement.
Medvedev: No Israeli attack:
MOSCOW — Russian President Dmitry Medvedev says Israeli officials have assured him that they are not planning a military strike on Iran. In an interview with CNN television broadcast Sunday, Medvedev also confirmed Israeli Prime Minister Benjamin Netanyahu made a secret visit to Moscow this month.
Iran's leader says U.S. wrong:
TEHRAN, Iran — Iran's supreme leader said Sunday U.S. officials know they are wrongly accusing Iran of seeking to develop nuclear weapons. Ayatollah Ali Khamenei claimed President Barack Obama's administration is following the same policies as its predecessor.
Cubans attend ‘peace concert':
HAVANA — Hundreds of thousands of Cubans flocked to Revolution Plaza on Sunday for an open-air "peace concert" headlined by Colombian rocker Juanes, an event criticized by some Cuban-Americans who say the performers are lending support to the island's communist government simply by showing up for the event.
No terrorism charges:
AURORA, Colo. — The arrest of a Colorado airport shuttle driver as part of a terrorism investigation reveals a murky plot that involved him receiving explosives training with al-Qaida in Pakistan and downloading instructions on how to build bombs. But one thing is missing — actual terrorism charges.
Obama rejects health fines:
WASHINGTON — President Barack Obama says requiring people to get health insurance and fining them if they don't would not amount to a backhanded tax increase. "I absolutely reject that notion," he said. Blanketing most of the Sunday TV news shows, Obama defended his proposed health care overhaul.
Obama to Olympic meeting?
WASHINGTON — The White House is sending an advance team to Copenhagen, Denmark, to make preparations in case President Barack Obama decides to attend the International Olympic Committee's meeting there next month. The committee will choose a host city for the 2016 summer Olympics on Oct. 2.
Troops decision to wait:
WASHINGTON — President Barack Obama says he hasn't asked Gen. Stanley McChrystal, his top commander in Afghanistan, to sit on an expected request for U.S. reinforcements in a backsliding war, but he gave no deadline for making a decision about whether to send more Americans into harm's way.
FBI: Bomb notes found:
DENVER — Investigators said they found notes describing how to make bombs in the handwriting of airport shuttle driver Najibullah Zazi, who was arrested as part of a terrorism investigation, and they also discovered his fingerprints on materials — batteries and a scale — that could be used to make explosives.
Fire funds pulled before blaze:
LOS ANGELES — Months before a wildfire burned 280 square miles at the edge of Los Angeles, a group was awarded a $178,000 grant to clear flammable brush and tree limbs to protect a mountain neighborhood in the Angeles National Forest. The work was never done, and the grant was rescinded two days before the massive blaze ignited.
Insane killer recaptured:
SEATTLE — Phillip Arnold Paul, 47, an insane killer who slipped away from the staff of a mental institution on a field trip Thursday to the Spokane County Interstate Fair, was recaptured Sunday without injury more than 180 miles away in south-central Washington state. He seemed ready to surrender, Klickitat County Sheriff Rick McComas told The Associated Press.
IRS extends amnesty program:
WASHINGTON — The IRS is extending the Wednesday deadline for international tax dodgers to apply for an amnesty program in order to give a rush of applicants more time to prepare their paperwork. More than 3,000 Americans hiding assets overseas have already applied for the program.

Load-Date: September 21, 2009


End of Document