WORLD IN BRIEF;
Terrorism group role alleged
The Atlanta Journal and Constitution
December 27, 1997, Saturday,
ALL EDITIONS


Copyright 1997 The Atlanta Constitution
Section: FOREIGN NEWS; Pg. 05A
Length: 656 words
Byline: From news services
Body


A German accused of planning a suicide bombing in Israel belonged to a unit of would-be assailants recruited in Europe by the Islamic militant group Hezbollah, an Israeli newspaper reported Friday.
The unit was established two years ago to enlist European-looking people to carry out attacks in Israel, the Yediot Ahronot daily said.
The newspaper said 26-year-old Stephan Josef Smyrek of Braunschweig, who has been held in Israel since Nov. 28, was part of that unit.
Smyrek was charged Thursday with plotting a suicide attack in Israel. However, his lawyer, Daniel Assan, said the case against him was weak.
Assan said Smyrek has been held in solitary confinement for three weeks and was not allowed to contact a lawyer or the German Embassy in Tel Aviv.
"I would say the conditions under which he was held are fertile ground for producing a false confession," Assan said.
 
AFRICA Mubarak ratifies death sentences
Egyptian President Hosni Mubarak ratified death sentences against two brothers convicted of killing nine German tourists and their Egyptian tour bus driver outside the Egyptian Museum, a newspaper reported. Saber Abu el-Ulla, a former mental patient, and his brother, Mahmoud, were convicted in October.
 
Fatal mystery illness may be animal-related
A mysterious disease that has caused scores of Kenyans to bleed to death from the nose and mouth may be related to a livestock affliction, a health official said. Twelve possible diseases are being investigated, including yellow fever and dengue. Ebola tentatively has been ruled out.
 
ASIA Fire injures 12, shuts down oil refinery
An explosion at a Shell refinery on the Malaysian island of Borneo Thursday injured 12 people, ignited fires and forced the plant's closure. Rescue workers pumped water and foam over fires that were still burning a day later, said a company spokesman. The situation, he said, was under control.
 
Fees to emperor's cousin investigated
Japan's imperial palace is investigating $ 7,700 in fees that Emperor Akihito's cousin received from two industry associations. As a member of the imperial family, Prince Katsura is not supposed to receive outside compensation for public service.
 
EUROPE Yeltsin urges generous spirit for 'new rich'
Russians are at risk of losing their spiritual values as they plunge into a new world of materialism, President Boris Yeltsin said in a year-end radio address. He called on Russia's new rich ---a group widely disliked by ordinary people ---to show more generosity.
 
'Jackal' seeks to have conviction overturned
Claiming he was not allowed to confront his accusers, the man knows as "Carlos the Jackal" asked France's highest court to overturn his conviction for a 1975 triple murder. Ilich Ramirez Sanchez has been sentenced to life in prison.
 
Fund to pay pensions to Holocaust survivors
The German government and Jewish groups have agreed to set up a fund that would pay pensions to Holocaust survivors in Eastern Europe, a newspaper reported. Details will be decided next month, the Berlin daily Tageszeitung reported. The Jewish Claims Conference would manage the fund and pay pensions to as many as 20,000 people, Tageszeitung said. The report did not say how much money would be paid out. Germany has paid about $ 55 billion to survivors of the Nazi regime, but those living in the Soviet bloc could not apply during the Cold War.
 
MIDDLE EAST Israeli women can get air combat training
The Israeli air force will open combat training to women and the first group of 30 female recruits will be taught how to operate anti-aircraft batteries this summer, a magazine reported.
 
Santa arrives in Iraq with gifts, message
A plane loaded with medicine and carrying a Santa with Christmas gifts landed in Iraq, the second U.N.-approved humanitarian aid flight to arrive in two days. The Santa, an unusual sight in this mostly Muslim country, stepped out of the plane with a sack of gifts and told reporters: "Stop killing my children."

Load-Date: December 28, 1997


End of Document