WORLD TERRORISM: A REPORT TO NATO PAINTS A DARK PORTRAIT
The New York Times
November 14, 1986, Friday, Late City Final Edition


Copyright 1986 The New York Times Company
Section: Section A; Page 10, Column 3; Foreign Desk
Length: 861 words
Byline: By JUDITH MILLER, Special to the New York Times
Dateline: ISTANBUL, Turkey, Nov. 13
Body


A draft report prepared for lawmakers from the 16-member Atlantic alliance concludes that international terrorism is becoming more sophisticated, increasingly sponsored by Middle Eastern countries and deadlier each year.
The 52-page report singles out Syria, Iran and Libya as countries that have ''actively'' sponsored international terrorism, along with the Palestine Liberation Organization. It says the P.L.O. is a ''government in waiting'' whose diplomatic missions and large fund-raising operations have supported terrorist actions.
The report chides Western Europeans for preferring to respond to terrorist attacks with political measures that have sought mainly to ''catch up'' with events rather than ''prevent the escalation of terrorism.''
But it is also somewhat critical of the retaliatory and pre-emptive strikes mounted by Israel against terrorist groups in the Middle East and the United States for its air raid on Libya in April.
 
Report by British Laborite
''It is the view of the rapporteur that such action must remain exceptional,'' the report concludes, arguing that such attacks are often militarily ineffective and divide the alliance.
The report was written for the Atlantic Assembly's Political Committee by Bruce George, a British Labor Party Member of Parliament who is on the Defense Committee of the House of Commons. It is scheduled to be debated Friday by the assembly's working group on terrorism and to be presented, along with a set of recommendations for action, to the full assembly on Monday.
The North Atlantic Assembly is the annual gathering of lawmakers from the 16 NATO members. More than 180 legislators are gathered here, representing almost every political persuasion in the Atlantic alliance.
The assembly's resolutions are not binding either on the North Atlantic Treaty Organization or on individual member countries. But Mr. George said tonight in an interview that acceptance of his report and its recommendations by the assembly ''would represent an important consensus on terrorism that transcends NATO's boundaries.''
 
Includes New Details
The report has been much discussed here not only because of its frank presentation of weaknesses in the Atlantic alliance's efforts to combat terrorism, but also because of some new details it includes.
Based on reports by assembly member governments, interviews with terrorism experts in several countries and public press reports, the study concludes that from 1973 to 1983, 3,689 people died and 7,791 were wounded in 5,175 terrorist attacks.
In the first half of 1986 alone, by contrast, United States Government statistics indicate that 488 international terrorist incidents worldwide caused 422 deaths and 981 injuries. In the 1980's, the number of incidents involving deaths has increased by as much as 20 percent a year, the report says.
In the last five years, 25 percent of all incidents in Europe, where at least 36 percent of the attacks in the last five years have occurred, were of Middle Eastern origin.
 
Critical of Libya
The report is extremely critical of Libya, which it asserts spends $70 million to $100 million a year in direct support of about 40 terrorist groups, and which it says houses at least 20 terrorist camps that have trained more than 7,000 volunteers in the use of billions of dollars' worth of Soviet weapons.
Although six European Community members have recently taken steps to reduce the number of Libyans in their countries and other anti-Libyan measures, Mr. George wrote that he was ''disheartened by the fact that once again the allies have found themselves in a position of reacting to a crisis rather than trying to prevent it.''
The report concludes that although bombings and assassinations will continue as the ''preferred'' weapons of terrorists in the foreseeable future, ''there is a danger that terrorists will begin to employ more sophisticated means of sabotage, such as either damaging high-technology computer networks or poisoning water, food supplies or household products,'' as terrorist groups become more sophisticated.
The report, which was completed two weeks ago and is still being revised, does not mention the Reagan Administration's decision to sell arms to Iran to try to bring about the release of American hostages and to reopen communications with more moderate elements in the Government.
 
'Dangers of Appeasement'
But the draft report warns in general against ''the dangers of appeasement.'' It also recommends an improvement in the allies' ''hostage rescue capabilities.''
''In the area of anti-terrorist commando squads,'' Mr. George writes, ''the U.S. capability is relatively weak.'' Specifically, he adds, the Delta Force, the Americans' special anti-terrorist squad, ''would benefit from forward basing in Europe or the Middle East where it could more rapidly respond to a crisis.''
On a legal level, the report recommends the adoption by NATO countries of a ''mutual extradition practice'' that would eliminate many of the ''safe havens'' that permit terrorism to spread, as well as the elimination of ''loopholes'' in current accords and anti-terrorism resolutions that make them ''little more than recommendations.''


End of Document