Worldwide terrorist attacks fewer but bloodier
The Tampa Tribune (Florida)
April 29, 1995, Saturday,
FINAL EDITION


Copyright 1995 The Tribune Co. Publishes The Tampa Tribune
Section: NATION/WORLD,
Length: 611 words
Byline: BOB DEANS; of Cox News Service
Dateline: WASHINGTON
Body


Acts of international terrorism, a modern scourge widely perceived to be spreading, actually declined 25 percent last year to its lowest level in more than two decades, the State Department reported Friday.
The world isn't safer, though, because terrorists - sometimes aligned with drug kingpins and organized crime - are targeting civilians in increasingly bloody attacks, the State Department's annual report on global terror said.
Seven countries - Cuba, Iran, Iraq, Libya, North Korea, Sudan and Syria - continue to sponsor terrorism, it said.
"It is still a very, very serious threat to our national security and to that of our friends," said Phil Wilcox, the State Department's coordinator for counter-terrorism. "The growing sophistication and mobility, technical competence, the ingenuity of terrorists and their ability to use modern communications makes them a more dangerous threat around the world."
Each year, the State Department catalogs international terrorism, defined as "politically inspired violence against noncombatants, involving citizens of more than one country or the territory of more than one country," Wilcox said.
Last week's Oklahoma City bombing likely won't be included in next year's global terrorism report, because it was "we're almost certain, entirely a domestic crime."
Friday's report cited 321 bombings, kidnappings, armed attacks and other international terrorist acts during 1994.
That was down from 431 international terrorist acts the year before and 665 acts in 1987 - peak year for international terrorism.
Wilcox attributed the decline to intensive diplomacy and a global crackdown on terrorism, including a willingness by many governments to treat terrorists as criminals and not political activists.
"More terrorists are being arrested, prosecuted or extradited, as nations increasingly look to law enforcement as the best weapon against terrorists," Wilcox said.
"In the past, there was often a tendency to tolerate terrorism, to look the other way, because of the political motivation of the terrorists."
Last year's terrorist acts left 977 people dead or seriously wounded. That's 18 percent more than the average number of casualties inflicted per year by terrorists during the previous five years.
Figures for 1993 - 1,510 terrorism casualties - were boosted by the World Trading Center bombing that killed six and injured roughly 1,000.
The statistics suggest that terrorists are killing and hurting more people per act than before. One reason: Terrorists are increasingly preying upon civilians in low-security, non-government facilities that offer little protection from terrorist acts.
The prospect of a terrorist attack with a sophisticated weapon of mass destruction remains, Wilcox said.
"We are deeply concerned about the prospect of terrorists getting hold of nuclear, biological or chemical substances and using them for terrorist purposes."
While the Soviet Union's collapse has meant many Cold War terrorist groups have lost their patron and refuge, it has also raised new worries over the security of thousands of nuclear weapons scattered across the former Soviet empire.
Those concerns have meshed with the quest by such nations as Iran for its own weapons of mass destruction and its continuing support for international terrorism.
"Iran is still the leading sponsor, state sponsor, of terrorism," Wilcox said. "It continues to assassinate dissidents abroad. It maintains direct support for the Hezbollah, which is one of the most dangerous and lethal terrorist organizations. … And it is using its resources, money, materiel, to support those groups which are using terrorism against the (Middle East) peace process."

Load-Date: May 17, 1995


End of Document