World news in brief
Telegraph Herald (Dubuque, IA)
December 23, 2018 Sunday


Copyright 2018 Woodward Communications, Inc. All Rights Reserved
Section: A; Pg. 7
Length: 801 words
Byline: The Associated Press
Body


Cuba's National Assembly
approves update of constitution
HAVANA - Cuba's National Assembly on Saturday approved an update of the country's constitution, the final step before a national referendum expected to approve the new charter in February.
The new constitution contains more continuity than change, although it recognizes the de-facto modernization of Cuban society over the last decade. The constitution maintains Cuba as a centrally planned economy ruled by a single Communist Party, but recognizes private property for the first time and paves the way for a separate referendum on legalizing gay marriage.
It also creates the role of prime minister alongside the current president, as well as provincial governors.
Closing the National Assembly, President Miguel Diaz-Canel said the island's economic challenges - including a weak 1.2 percent 2018 growth rate, and similar growth expected next year - required the acceptance of private business, joint public-private ventures and coops working together.
Palestinian president pledges to dissolve parliament
RAMALLAH, West Bank - Palestinian President Mahmoud Abbas pledged on Saturday to implement a court ruling and dissolve the parliament controlled by his rival Hamas movement, triggering warnings of chaos from the Islamic militant group.
Abbas' announcement is the latest in a series of bitter splits and rivalries between his Fatah party and Hamas, which began in 2007 when Hamas routed his forces and took over Gaza, keeping his rule limited to parts of the Israeli-occupied West Bank.
Syrian troops send reinforcements to eastern province near IS enclave
BEIRUT - Syrian troops have sent reinforcements to the eastern province of Deir el-Zour close to an enclave controlled by the Islamic State group and along the front with U.S.-backed Kurdish-led fighters, a war monitor and pro-government pages on social media said Saturday.
The reinforcements arrived after U.S. President Donald Trump on Wednesday announced he was pulling all 2,000 U.S. troops out of Syria. Trump has now declared victory over IS, contradicting assessments by his own experts, with many lawmakers calling his decision rash and dangerous.
Director of Nicaragua TV station accused of inciting terrorism
MANAGUA, Nicaragua - The director of a TV station critical of President Daniel Ortega was accused Saturday of inciting terrorism after authorities raided and shut down the station's offices in their latest salvo against independent media and nongovernmental organizations.
Miguel Mora's wife, Veronica Chavez, who is also a journalist, accused police at a news conference of carrying out a "kidnapping" of her husband "on orders of the dictatorship of Daniel Ortega and (first lady and Vice President) Rosario Murillo."
Protests continue in Sudan
CAIRO - Protests over worsening economic conditions resumed Saturday for a fourth consecutive day, with thousands taking to the streets in a string of Sudanese cities, including the capital Khartoum, as activists reported that authorities rounded up more than a dozen politicians from a leftist opposition coalition.
The continuing unrest is striking in a country where any potentially serious threat to President Omar Bashir's 29-year Islamic rule has been brutally quashed.
Japanese emperor proud of peace
TOKYO - Japan's Emperor Akihito, marking his 85th birthday - his last before his upcoming abdication - said he feels relieved that his reign is coming to an end without having seen his country at war and that it is important to keep telling younger people about his nation's wartime history.
"It gives my deep comfort that the Heisei era is coming to an end, free of war in Japan," Akihito said at a news conference at the palace that was recorded this past week and released Sunday.
Canada urges release of 2 citizens
TORONTO - Canadian Foreign Minister Chrystia Freeland said Saturday that Canada will embark on a campaign to win the release of two citizens detained by China in apparent retaliation for the arrest of a top Chinese tech executive.
Freeland said on a conference call with reporters that the arrests constitute a worrying precedent that has resonated with partners.
"We're going to keep working with a broad group of allies to raise this issue," she said, noting that Canadian ambassadors will be reaching out to governments across the world.
6 militants killed in Kashmir
SRINAGAR, India - A gunbattle between Indian troops and Kashmiri rebels early Saturday left six militants dead and triggered a new round of anti-India protests in the disputed Himalayan region.
The fighting began after government forces came under fire during a raid on a militant hideout in the southern Tral area, according to police. Troops retaliated and six militants were killed in the brief exchange of fire, police said.
The Associated Press

Load-Date: January 8, 2019


End of Document