WORLD'S LAWYERS QUESTION OBAMA ON HUMAN RIGHTS; IMPATIENCE SETS IN ON GUANTANAMO DETAINEES
Pittsburgh Post-Gazette (Pennsylvania)
April 26, 2009 Sunday
TWO STAR EDITION


Copyright 2009 P.G. Publishing Co.
Section: WORLD; Pg. A-6
Length: 919 words
Byline: Carol J. Williams, Los Angeles Times
Body


WASHINGTON -- President Barack Obama's early moves to condemn torture, order the closure of the detention center at Guantanamo Bay, Cuba, and make a commitment to combat climate change won him accolades from international human-rights advocates turned off by the go-it-alone attitude of the Bush administration.
Now, the world's lawyers are worried that those goals might languish on the diplomatic back burner as Mr. Obama and his team concentrate on the global economic crisis.
Champions of the environment and the rule of law concede that Mr. Obama has a lot on his plate, but impatience is setting in after opportunities in recent weeks to signal a new direction in fighting terrorism and global warming were passed over.
Legal experts have been able to do little more than shake hands and give cursory review to their differences at international gatherings such as the Group of 20 economic summit in London, an international law forum in Washington and the United Nations climate conference in Bonn, Germany.
Since the Bush administration declared its war on terrorism after the Sept. 11, 2001, terrorist attacks, rights activists have spoken out against the indefinite detention and harsh interrogation of terrorism suspects at Guantanamo -- extreme measures that former President George W. Bush insisted were necessary to keep the United States safe.
At least a dozen nations have signaled they are willing to help hasten Guantanamo's closure by taking in some prisoners no longer considered a security threat yet faced with torture or execution if returned to their home countries.
During Mr. Obama's meetings with world leaders in London this month, French President Nicolas Sarkozy said France would accept an Algerian detainee. But other nations are waiting to see what Washington is willing to do first.
They point to the U.S. failure to grant asylum to 17 Uighurs who were cleared for release years ago but who are viewed as secessionist traitors by China and thus might be tortured or executed if returned to their home country.
"It's a political question in our country as to whether we should take people when the United States has not yet, in spite of this being a problem of their own making," said Andreas Paulus, a law professor at Germany's Goettingen University. "The view many abroad have of the United States now is that they use international law when it suits them and drop it when it doesn't."
Humanitarian-law experts say they expect to see a return to compliance with the Geneva Conventions and other pacts within the Law of War by U.S. armed forces fighting against those deemed terrorists.
Yoram Dinstein, a Tel Aviv University international-law professor, describes the violence inflicted on civilians by U.S. bombing raids of suspected terrorist hide-outs as willful disregard for treaty obligations.
"You can kill all the combatants you want. What you are not allowed to do is cause collateral damage -- civilian casualties," said Mr. Dinstein, who sees little change in U.S. war fighting since Mr. Obama's inauguration.
The International Committee of the Red Cross has drafted guidance on determining legitimate targets in armed conflicts, the product of years of research and negotiation that U.S. officials continue to keep at arm's length.
Limiting targeted killing to those actively and "continuously" engaged in hostile actions and restricting the use of force to "no more than necessary under the circumstances," as the Red Cross guidance to be published in June prescribes, is going to be "problematic" from the U.S. viewpoint, said Stephen Pomper, a State Department lawyer responsible for Law of War issues.
The hesitance to make a radical departure from the Bush years in security matters has some legal analysts concerned that Mr. Obama's team is more talk than action.
On environmental issues, Mr. Obama has stirred more confidence over long-term reform, despite echoing some of Mr. Bush's reasoning for having opted out of the Kyoto Protocol. All developed nations except the United States have issued binding commitments to cut emissions of greenhouse gases. The Bush administration refused to adhere to Kyoto on grounds that it lacked limits on key developing nations China and India.
Todd Stern, special envoy on climate change for the State Department, told U.N. officials meeting in Bonn this month that the Obama administration was determined to make up for lost time.
"We do not doubt the science, we do not doubt the urgency, and we do not doubt the enormity of the challenge before us," Mr. Stern said. But he also alluded to a need for pragmatism and a focus on what is achievable.
Hans Corell, a Swedish diplomat who was U.N. undersecretary for legal affairs for a decade, said the international community had faith that Mr. Obama would recover the leading role the United States lost by ignoring treaties and human-rights accords.
"I belong to the generation that looked up to the United States of America as the best model of democracy. As a European, I remember that Americans came and pulled us out of the muck," the 69-year-old said about post-World War II Europe. "But Guantanamo and Abu Ghraib have been blotches on the 'Star-Spangled Banner.' The Americans have lost the moral high ground with this so-called war on terror."
Whether there is a role for the International Court of Justice in prosecuting terrorism suspects from Guantanamo or other U.S.-run detention facilities remains to be seen.

Graphic

 
PHOTO: Associated Press: Taliban and al-Qaida detainees sit in a holding area at Camp X-Ray at Guantanamo Bay in 2002.

Load-Date: April 27, 2009


End of Document