World Terrorism Serpents - Be wary
Sentinel Tribune (Westbrook, Minnesota)
January 14, 2015


Copyright 2015 SmallTownPapers, Inc.
 All Rights Reserved
SmallTownPapers, Inc.
Copyright 2015 Sentinel Tribune


This content, including derivations, may not be stored or distributed in any manner, disseminated, published, broadcast, rewritten or reproduced without express, written consent from STPNS
Length: 489 words
Byline: Sentinel Tribune staff
Body


My wife and I were walking an Appalachian path a few months back when a poisonous copperhead snake struck at my wife. The snake was big. My wife was carrying pepper spray and amazingly with one quick move sprayed that deadly serpent. The snake was stunned as we lunged forward to safety. We were so very lucky. Either one of us could have died or lost a limb if that poisonous serpent had been successful. Journalists and cartoonists in a French newsroom were not so lucky this week. They were totally caught off guard by striking terrorists that ended their unsuspecting lives.
The attack on a Paris, France magazine killing twelve people is chilling. We must not allow such a heinous event to freeze us and keep us from practicing freedom and eliminating terrorism.
Christians, Muslims, Jews, white people, black people, Americans, French and all must be freedom united.
ISIS, militant Islamists, Taliban and others are working to destroy our freedom of speech, religious freedom and equality. Sometimes we think we have problems in America. If we want to understand problems look at Syria and parts of Iraq or any other region that is ruled by militant religious extremism. Ten journalists and two police officers sacrificed their lives for freedom of speech in Paris.
The French magazine Charlie Hebdo was internationally known for its satirical cartoons that outraged many Muslims. Some of those militant Muslims retaliated by enacting a bloodbath.
On September 11, 2001 we watched thousands die horrifically in New York City at the hands of terrorists. We have watched or heard of the hundreds killed in Mumbai through various attacks. We have seen parts of videos of journalists and humanitarians beheaded by terrorists. In France we saw a helpless police officer executed by terrorists after they had executed an entire newsroom. The accounts go on and on. Evil exists in the world and is alive and well.
People across the planet must unite. Good people must stop fighting each other. We have problems in our country and it could be a lot worse if we do not work together. We have no problems like what we could have if we lost our freedom. Americans must be strong. We must practice our faith boldly. Speech and freedom to express ourselves must not get quieter but louder. Police officers and the military need our full support. They have tough jobs. We need them to be as effective as possible.
Our job each day should be to do our part to keep our freedom. Treat each other kindly. Help each other. Practice the Golden Rule. Keep each other safe. Yet, unfortunately we have to live warily. Evil is a slithering serpent that might strike anyplace and anytime. Being caught off guard could be fatal. Dr. Glenn Mollette is a syndicated American columnist and author. He is read in all 50 states. The views expressed are those of the author and are not necessarily representative of any other group, organization or this publication.

Load-Date: March 19, 2016


End of Document