WORLD LEADERS PLEDGE ATTACK ON TERRORISM IRAN SINGLED OUT FOR HARSHEST DEMANDS FROM ECONOMIC POWERS
Charleston Daily Mail (West Virginia)
June 29, 1996, Saturday


Copyright 1996 Charleston Newspapers
Section: News; Pg. 01A
Length: 476 words
Byline: The Associated Press
Body


LYON, France - President Clinton and other world leaders today
threatened sanctions against the Serbian government if it doesn't help
force from power Bosnia-Serb leaders indicted as war criminals.
Mindful of the truck bombing in Saudi Arabia earlier this week and
other attacks, the leaders also demanded in a joint communique that
Iran "reject terrorism" and they urged full peace in the Middle East.
"We will continue to provide our full support to those who take risks
for peace," they said as they wrapped up their annual economic
summit.
The political declaration came in the final meeting of the world's
seven richest democracies and Russian Prime Minister Viktor
Chernomyrdin, a stand-in for Russian President Boris Yeltsin.
Bosnia was dealt with in a separate communique. At Clinton's urging,
the eight leaders insisted that Radovan Karadzic and Ratko Mladic,
Bosnian Serb leaders accused of war crimes, be denied any
decision-making influence in the former Yugoslav republic. Elections
are due there in mid-September and Karadzic has said he might compete.
"We demand that Mr. Karadzic renounce definitively and immediately all
public functions and not participate in any governmental decisions. He
must pass all of his powers to new officials."
Otherwise, the summit partners said, the self-styled Bosnian Serb
Republic will be denied international assistance.
The statement said, "We are equally ready to consider the use of
sanctions toward any party to the peace accord," including the
Serbian government in Belgrade.
Serbian President Slobodan Milosevic has promised American mediator
John Kornblum to force from power the Bosnian-Serb leaders, who were
indicted by a war crimes tribunal in The Hague.
In a summit that had been dominated by the subject of terrorism - on
the heels of Tuesday's gruesome bombing of a U.S. military complex in
Saudi Arabia - the declaration dwelt at some length with the issue.
Iran was singled out for the toughest criticism. "We call on the
Iranian government to reject terrorism," it said.
Specifically, the allies insisted that Iranian authorities lift their
longstanding death threat against British writer Salman Rushdie, whose
novels the late Ayatollah Ruhollah Khomeini denounced as blasphemy
against Islam.
The summit partners, at the urging of the United States, included
strong language condemning Iran, Iraq and Libya and promoting
continuation of U.N. sanctions.
A day earlier, however, the nations' economic communique had
criticized U.S. legislation to punish international companies for
trading with Cuba, Iraq and Iran - nations the United States brands as
sponsors of terrorism.
On the Middle East, the statement called for Israel to do more to
allow Palestinians who live in Gaza and the occupied West Bank to work
in Israel proper. And the summit partners called on Syria and Lebanon
to join comprehensive regional peace talks with Israel

Load-Date: July 2, 1996


End of Document