World events through ages at root of terrorism
The Columbian (Vancouver, WA.)
January 27, 2003, Monday


Copyright 2003 The Columbian Publishing Co.
Section: World/Nation; Pg. a7
Length: 744 words
Byline: GREGG HERRINGTON, Columbian staff writer
Body


World events, from the Crusades to present-day U.S. policy toward Israel, are at the root of Muslim terrorism, not the religion of Islam itself, say several Northwest academics.
Faculty members from the University of Washington and Washington State University Vancouver also said they either opposed an attack on Iraq or believe long-term peace in the region would be better served if an invasion has the support of the United Nations.
Excerpts of the interviews follow.
n Prof. Brannon Wheeler, Islamic Studies, UW:
The Koran contains passages that could be interpreted to justify violence against both Muslims and non-Muslims. But that's also the case for the Bible.
Almost any religious text can be interpreted to justify someone's position.
Historically, Islam has been a diverse and very tolerant religion.
Within the history of Muslims, there is more history of accommodation than among Christians.
The Crusades in Europe, encounters with the Turks, the Indians, the Chinese all of that goes into the history of how Muslims relate to non-Muslims.
In more recent times, there have been Muslim objections to non-Muslims being in their holy lands. That includes the Palestinian-Israeli situation and foreign troops on the Arabian Peninsula.
When Osama bin Laden makes a statement, he always mentions the situations with Iraq and with Israel. They are all linked. Solving one will contribute to solving the others.
I would rather see the United States and its allies attempting to improve the living circumstances of people than to talk in terms of changing regimes or eliminating people.
Prof. Robert Stacey, Medieval European history, UW:
It is a radical fringe we are talking about here, the same sort of radicalism that is represented by Christians who murder doctors who perform abortions.
The most important single fact for people to understand about Islam is its enormous diversity and the way it has become integrated into the cultures of people around the world.
The Koran's attitude toward nonbelievers is more tolerant than was Christian practice in the Middle Ages.
Some say the real beginnings of hostilities go back to the Crusades, in which Christians attacked the Muslims, who had controlled the Holy Land for 450 years.
My view is that the animosity between these two groups stems from the contempt held by European colonialists from the late 18th Century on for a culture of the Muslim world that they regarded as weak.
It was bitter, it was exploitative, it was like colonial relations around most of the world. You create ideas of a superior and inferior cultures.
Prof. Christopher Jones, international studies, UW:
You could make a good case that Saddam has stymied the United Nations and that he's not cooperating fully with the inspections. On that basis, you might have a legal case for military action.
The argument for invasion would be much stronger if weapons of mass destruction were uncovered.
Prof. Wendy Dasler Johnson, WSU-Vancouver:
The Koran is big enough that people tend to look into it and find what they want, like the Bible. That leads to extremists in any tradition heading off in sometimes violent directions.
There is a lot of bad feeling stemming from the Crusades as far back as the 11th Century, and control of Jerusalem and holy sites in the Middle east.
But more recent geopolitical developments also are factors.
When the British took control of the Middle East early in the last century, they arbitrarily carved things up.  They threw people together who had always been at each other's throats.
I study rhetoric and persuasion. My greatest hope is that people with deeply different backgrounds and positions can talk to each other in a way others can really hear.
Prof. Ronald Woods, American foreign policy, UW, and a former U.S. diplomat and staff director for Henry Kissinger in the mid-1970s:
The great powers are never looked at with total benevolence by poorer countries.
Another contributor to the current situation focuses on the Israel-Palestine issue. That's why bin Laden has the support he has.
Saddam is certainly a threat. He wants to develop nuclear weapons and we should be addressing it.
Military power is the backbone of strong diplomacy. It is the ultimate sanction. I would not move on it without an international consensus. That means another U.N. Security Council resolution.
We will win, and after that we will need more support for rebuilding and managing other problems in the region that our very actions will create.

Load-Date: January 28, 2003


End of Document