World unites against terrorism
The Collegio: Pittsburg State University
January 23, 2015 Friday


University Wire
Copyright 2015 UWIRE via U-Wire All Rights Reserved
Section: WELCOME; Pg. 1
Length: 530 words
Body


 | Kyleigh Becker reporter |
The Paris terrorist attacks reverberated way beyond France's borders, says Leo Asselin, PSU graduate student in business administration.
"I would qualify this as our personal 9/11," said Asselin, from France. "It wasn't only an attack toward French people, but it was an attack to France itself. That's why I say this. Beyond the deaths, the symbol of free press was attacked."
Paris
Seventeen people were killed in the Paris area by four al Qaeda-linked suspects. The attacks began Wednesday, Jan. 7, at the office of Charlie Hebdo satire magazine and ended Friday, Jan. 9, at a printing factory outside of Paris.
Cherif and Said Kouachi are the alleged gunmen of the Charlie Hebdo shooting, which left 12 dead. A third suspect opened fire in a market later that day killing four civilians, one police officer and leaving another wounded. The suspect was killed by police that day and the Kouachi brothers were gunned down at the printing facility on Friday. However, French authorities are still on the lookout for a fourth suspect, believed to have aided in the market attack.
In the weeks since the attacks the world has come together to show unity against terrorism.
Myriam Krepps, associate professor of French, says the French may not be known for patriotism, but in the weeks since the attacks the Republic has come together.
In Krepps' hometown of Toulouse, nearly 140,000 people took to the streets in response to the attacks. Other symbols of patriotism, such as French senators singing "La Marseillaise," the national anthem, which has not been done since 1908, have also taken place.
Asselin calls Paris home and says the attacks resulted in more than 1 million people marching in the streets.
"It warms my heart," he said. "It was really great to see a population united around the symbol that was Charlie Hebdo."
He added that it feels strange to be far from home while these events have taken place.
"I feel my support is not perceived, not as well as if I would have been in Paris," Asselin said. "I have missed the little details but have been asking friends back home for as much information as I can get."
Krepps says that with the French citizens and the world uniting, the attacks backfired on the terrorists.
"It has made everybody proud of the fact that in a moment of extreme distress and duress that the French people are united together for the same cause against terrorism," Krepps said.
However, Krepps says the attack itself was not entirely surprising.
Charlie Hebdo has been attacked before. In 2005 a firebomb was thrown into the office's window and France has reported terror crimes since the 1970s.
"It was surprising they would go against cartoonists and in such a horrible way," Krepps said.
Increased police protection has been placed on several centers since the attacks, including Jewish schools and synagogues, as well as Muslim mosques.
"How much can you protect places without making the country into a police state? You don't want to create a psychosis and people fearing to go anyplace all the time," Krepps said. "People have to feel safe enough and not reminded constantly that we live in a dangerous world to live happily."

Load-Date: January 25, 2015


End of Document