WORLD LEADERS CONDEMN BOMBINGS, OFFER HELP IN TRACKING DOWN CULPRITS
St. Louis Post-Dispatch (Missouri)
August 9, 1998, Sunday, EARLY FIVE STAR EDITION


Copyright 1998 St. Louis Post-Dispatch, Inc.
Section: NEWS, Pg. A7
Length: 302 words
Byline: The Associated Press
Dateline: LONDON
Body


Australia and Russia said they want to help fight terrorism. Israel, South Africa and England provided rescue workers. The pope sent up prayers.
Terrorist bombings at two U.S. embassies in east Africa brought expressions of horror from world leaders Saturday - and offers of help.
British Foreign Secretary Robin Cook said Friday's attacks were "cowardly acts," and he pledged that his country would help "in any way it can."
In a message to President Bill Clinton, Russian leader Boris Yeltsin called the bombings a brazen challenge to the entire world community and pledged to act with other countries to do whatever is necessary to fight terrorism, the Interfax news agency said Saturday.
From Canberra, Australian Prime Minister John Howard echoed that pledge and said he wants to help "uncover the perpetrators of these bombings."
 
Egypt, Saudi Arabia and Bangladesh expressed outrage and sorrow.
Vatican Radio said that Pope John Paul II had offered prayers for the dead and that the pontiff hoped the attacks would encourage the international community "to cooperate and double efforts aimed at building a world of peace and justice."
The explosions occurred within minutes of each other at the embassies in Nairobi, Kenya, and Dar es Salaam, Tanzania. It was not clear who was responsible for the attacks, but even governments on the U.S. State Department's list of terrorist-sponsoring nations spoke out.
"We condemn the bombingsand sympathize with the victims and their families," Iranian Foreign Minister Kamal Kharrazi said.
The government of Cuban President Fidel Castro condemned the bombings on Friday and expressed "its most deeply felt sorrow."
U.N. Secretary-General Kofi Annan condemned the bombings as "heartless and indiscriminate terrorism" and said several U.N. staff members were among those injured.

Load-Date: August 9, 1998


End of Document