WORLD LEADERS DENOUNCE TERRORISM CLINTON, MUBARAK AND OTHERS GATHER IN SHOW OF SOLIDARITY
Charleston Daily Mail (West Virginia)
March 13, 1996, Wednesday


Copyright 1996 Charleston Newspapers
Section: News; Pg. 03A
Length: 916 words
Byline: The Associated Press
Body


SHARM EL-SHEIK, Egypt - In a dramatic show of solidarity, world leaders
met today to combat the wave of bombings that have shocked Israel and
ravaged the Middle East peace process. President Clinton proposed that
nations "join in a common defense" against terrorism.
The gathering of kings, sheiks, prime ministers, presidents and princes
was a striking display of unity in response to anti-Israeli extremists
who unleashed four suicide bombs, killing 62 people in nine bloody days.
"With every milestone passed in the path of peace the enemies of
peace have grown more desperate and depraved," Clinton said, declaring,
"Let our charge go forth from the Sinai today: we will win the battle
for peace."
One after another, the leaders urged unity in battling the bombers of
Hamas.
Palestine Liberation Organization leader Yasser Arafat, whose commitment
to curbing violence is questioned by many Israelis, promised to "stand
against terrorism" and "uproot it from our lands because our dreams of
self-determination could never come true in a sea of blood and tears."
He called for unity between Israel and Palestinians, and said he viewed
the summit as a show of support for his people. "You are with us," he
told the leaders.
But underlying the words of unity and determination were tough questions
about how to fashion solutions to terrorism, as well as allusions to the
decades of bitter distrust that were just beginning to heal.
Arafat complained about the closure of the West Bank and Gaza Strip -
and the blockading of Palestinian towns - that he said was strangling
his people's economy "to the extent of famine." The action by Israel
also undermined the PLO's political standing in the region, Arafat said.
Israeli Prime Minister Shimon Peres demanded action from the
Palestinians, noting that "security and peace are indivisible."
"They must fight to prevent terror," declared Peres, whose political
future Clinton hoped to bolster by visiting the Middle East.
In a personal plea to his fellow leaders, Peres said, "Terrorism knows
no borders; so borders must not restrain action to smash the terrorist
snake."
Egyptian President Hosni Mubarak, co-host of the summit with Clinton and
Russian President Boris Yeltsin, opened the meeting of 29 world leaders
with separate messages to Palestinians and Israelis. "Do not resort to
despair," he told Palestinians. "Do not give in to calls of
defeatism."
He warned Israelis about "falling to the abyss of fanaticism and
extremism. This will only bring us back to the vicious circle of
violence."
Yeltsin said the United Nations should be use to combat terrorism
"because terrorism has no national features."
Even as the leaders fretted about terrorism, Israeli police reported
that they received intelligence warnings that Hamas planned to carry out
a fresh attack during Clinton's overnight visit Wednesday and Thursday.
The range of leaders, from Clinton to Yeltsin to Foreign Minister Saud
al-Faisal of Saudi Arabia, reflected the acceptance Israel won in the
last three years by working out peace accords with the Palestine
Liberation Organization and Jordan.
Officials came from as far away as Japan and from countries as remote
from the peace process geographically as Canada and Ireland.
Denouncing the "merchants of hatred," Clinton said, "To the forces of
hatred and violence I say - and let us all say, 'You kill yourselves and
others in the aim of killing peace, yet today you see peace survives,
and peace will grow stronger. You will not succeed. Your day has past."
Peres told the world leaders Israel has suffered pain but not despair
and will do all it takes to defeat terrorism. Directing his remarks at
Iran, which was not invited to the summit, he said: "It is the regime
which initiates, promotes and exports violence and fanaticism. Tehran
has become the capital of terror. A conclusion must be drawn on how to
contain it."
Peres told reporters earlier that he was not ready to make political
gestures until Palestinians make more progress in containing anti-Israel
violence. He said the borders of Gaza and the West Bank will remain
closed, as they have been since the bombings. And he defended plans to
deport male relatives of suicide bombers. "Only men, not women, not
children, and not old people, and only the people I think are linked to
suicide bombers" will be deported, he said.
Israel-Syrian negotiations aimed at a land-for-peace accord were
suspended by Israel after the bombings. The United States is hoping for
a resumption soon. Also, State Department officials said today that
Israel and the Palestinians should get on with the next stage of their
negotiations over Jerusalem and other issues in May.
Four suicide bombings from Feb. 25 to March 4 caused Israelis to
question their gamble on peace. Many Israelis now oppose turning over
security in Gaza and most of the West Bank to Arafat's Palestinian a
uthority.
Syrian President Hafez Assad angered the U.S. by boycotting the summit.
"I wish they were there," Clinton said of Syria. "But I believe that in
terms of continuing the peace process and keeping commitments, that
President Assad will do that."
The Syrian Arab News Agency said Foreign Minister Farouk al-Sharaa told
U.S. Ambassador Christopher Ross that "The impulsiveness shrouding the
conference prove only that the conference will be facing a fait
accompli, endorsing Israel's views and serving Israel's interest."
Libya, outspoken foe of the peace process, lambasted today's the summit
as an exercise "dedicated to help the security of the Israeli enemy."
AP-DS-03-13-96 0739EST

Load-Date: March 14, 1996


End of Document