WORLD RESPONSE: APEC SUMMIT: Bush to emphasize war on terrorism at Asian meeting
The Atlanta Journal-Constitution
October 17, 2001 Wednesday,
Home Edition


Copyright 2001 The Atlanta Constitution
Section: News;
Length: 464 words
Byline: BOB DEANS
Body


Washington --- President Bush travels today to Shanghai to push 20 Asian-Pacific nations on his anti-terrorism campaign.
At the Asia Pacific Economic Cooperation summit, Bush will emphasize the war on terrorism, in meeting with his counterparts from China, Russia, Japan and 17 other Asian-Pacific nations.
"That is going to be the No. 1 priority, there's no question about that," the U.S. coordinator for APEC, Lawrence Greenwood, said recently. "The region is an important part of what is the broadest, perhaps most important coalition against a common enemy that we've seen in the history of mankind. APEC economies will be fighting this."
Cox Washington Bureau
The conference is expected to end with a joint statement from the nations on common ways to wage the global war on terrorism.
Bush also has started outlining his vision of a post-Taliban Afghanistan and called for a long-term program of humanitarian and development aid to be administered by the United Nations with financial assistance from the world community.
"There will be different conversations with different nations about what they think about the future of Afghanistan, about their efforts in the coalition," White House press secretary Ari Fleischer said Tuesday.
Bush arrives Thursday night in Shanghai, where he will meet at the mouth of the Yangtze River with his APEC counterparts. He is scheduled to return Monday.
The APEC meeting Saturday and Sunday is Bush's first trip to Asia as president, and it also will be his first international summit since the Sept. 11 terrorist attacks.
Bush will meet Chinese President Jiang Zemin for the first time Friday morning and hold a joint news conference afterward.
More important, however, will be Bush's meeting Sunday afternoon with Russian President Vladimir Putin. The first foreign leader to contact Bush after the Sept. 11 attacks, Putin has emerged in recent weeks as pivotal to the U.S. military strikes on Afghanistan against Osama bin Laden, his al-Qaida terrorist organization and their backers within the ruling Taliban regime.
The strikes have relied heavily upon support from former Soviet republics in Central Asia, especially Uzbekistan, which shares a border with Afghanistan.
Bush, who plans to host Putin at his Texas ranch in mid-November, expects to cooperate just as closely with Putin in the months ahead over the broader issue of how to deny money, passports and weapons to the al-Qaida operations in more than 60 countries around the world.
Several of them are Asian-Pacific countries, including the Philippines. The United States alleges that al-Qaida was linked to simultaneous bombings of the U.S. and Israeli embassies in the Philippines in 1994 and a plot, not carried out, to assassinate Pope John Paul II when he visited Manila that same year.

Load-Date: October 17, 2001


End of Document