World news in brief
Telegraph Herald (Dubuque, IA)
April 27, 2019 Saturday


Copyright 2019 Woodward Communications, Inc. All Rights Reserved
Section: C; Pg. 7
Length: 521 words
Body


Russia willing to discuss nukes with U.S., China
MOSCOW - A top Russian diplomat says Russia is willing to negotiate a new nuclear weapons treaty with the United States and China.
Deputy Foreign Minister Sergei Ryabkov told reporters on Friday Moscow is closely following reports in the United States that the U.S. would like to reach a nuclear weapons deal with both Russia and China, and is "willing" to negotiate.
Ryabkov also said that Russia "would like to convince" the U.S. to adopt a joint statement that would condemn any use of nuclear weapons.
U.N.: Yemen detains more than 2,000 migrants from Ethiopia
UNITED NATIONS - The U.N. says authorities in Yemen have detained over 2,000 migrants in the southern city of Aden since Sunday, including at least 400 children.
U.N. spokesman Stephane Dujarric said Friday the International Organization for Migration is "deeply concerned" about the conditions in which the migrants, mainly from Ethiopia, are being held.
The U.N. migration agency is engaging with Yemeni authorities to ensure that the migrants' critical needs such as basic health care, food, water and sanitation are met, he said. It is also urging authorities "to find safer alternatives to detention."
Yemeni security officials said Wednesday that police had detained at least 5,000 migrants in the previous 10 days who were attempting to cross to Saudi Arabia.
Second cyclone rips Mozambique
JOHANNESBURG - The second powerful cyclone to rip into Mozambique in just six weeks stunned residents Friday in a region where such storms had not been recorded in the modern era. Three deaths were reported from Cyclone Kenneth and the U.N. warned of "massive flooding" ahead.
Kenneth had maximum sustained winds of 136 mph, equal to a Category 4 hurricane, before it made landfall Thursday evening in far northern Mozambique, the Joint Typhoon Warning Center said.
It was the first time in recorded history that the southern African nation has been hit by two cyclones in one season, the U.N. said.
Syria accuses U.S., EU
of economic terrorism
DAMASCUS, Syria - Syria's ambassador to the United Nations on Friday accused the United States and the European Union of practicing "economic terrorism" against his country by imposing what he described as illegitimate and unilateral sanctions.
Bashar Ja'afari comments came amid widespread fuel shortages in Damascus and other government-controlled areas that have forced people to wait for hours in lines stretching several miles to get few liters gallons of gasoline.
Afghanistan has new parliament
KABUL, Afghanistan - The Afghan president inaugurated the country's new parliament on Friday, almost six months since elections were held and following long delays, unresolved disputes and political bickering.
Friday's inauguration brought together the lower, legislative 249-seat chamber and the appointed 104-member upper house.
Ghani, in his address, expressed regret over the delays and the fact that 33 seats for lawmakers from the districts in central Kabul province were empty because the election commission still has not announced results for those districts.
The Associated Press

Load-Date: May 1, 2019


End of Document