World Updates - Correction Appended
Business Insurance


 Correction Appended

Copyright 2003 Crain Communications Inc.
Section: Pg. 28
Length: 368 words
Body


ACE shifts business out of Lloyd's
ACE Ltd. has announced plans to move a large portion of its U.K. and European business out of Lloyd's of London and into the London market company of ACE INA U.K. Ltd. ACE announced that the subsidiary, formerly known as Insurance Co. of North America (U.K.) Ltd., had been reauthorized by the Financia Services Authority to underwrite all classes of nonlife insurance and reinsurance business. ACE said that during the next two years ACE INA U.K. would become ACE's principal U.K. and European carrier by establishing branches in 13 European countries.
Insured aviation losses down sharply in 2002
Insured aviation losses fell to $1.1 billion in 2002, from $6.1 billion in 2001, aviation consultant Airclaims Ltd. said. The 2002 hull and liability losses-in addition to being markedly lower than 2001, which included the Sept. 11 attacks-were lower than losses in most other years. ''The long-term trend (excluding 2001 figures) still predicts typical annual losses of $2.0 billion,'' and 2001 loss estimates continue to grow, London-based Airclaims said.
RSA redefines 'terrorism' in policies
London-based Royal & SunAlliance Insurance Group P.L.C. said it has narrowed its definition of ''terrorism'' to give greater certainty to commercial customers. RSA excludes terrorism from standard policies but lets buyers purchase extra terrorism coverage. Starting Jan. 1 , RSA said it defined ''terrorism'' in the same way in both its standard policy exclusions and in its terrorism policies: ''An act of any person acting on behalf of, or in connection with, any organization with activities directed towards the overthrowing or influencing of any government.''
Briefly noted
Aon Ltd. has set up a U.K. business development unit in London. Alun Davies, previously a senior vp of Cap Gemini Ernst & Young, is managing director of the new unit. Mr. Davies, who will also join Aon's retail operating committee, is charged with developing relationships with Aon clients and broadening the broker's U.K. client base, Aon said. Separately, Alistair Connell was named head of business development at Aon Consulting. He was previously a director at Gissings, a London-based benefits consultant.
Correction

Due to a reporting error, a Jan. 13 World Updates brief misidentified themanaging director of Aon Ltd.'s new U.K. business development unit in London. Alun Evans, who previously was a senior vp at Cap Gemini Ernst & Young, is the head of the new Aon unit.
Correction-Date: January 20, 2003, Monday

Load-Date: January 24, 2003


End of Document