World Briefs: Iran reports 6 terrorism suspects killed near Iraqi border
St. Louis Post-Dispatch (Missouri)
June 11, 2018 Monday
FINAL EDITION


Copyright 2018 St. Louis Post-Dispatch, Inc. All Rights Reserved
Section: NEWS; Pg. A9
Length: 975 words
Byline:  From news services 
Body


New cases of mystery ailment likely in Cuba
Cuba released details Sunday on the latest mysterious health incident involving a U.S. diplomat in the country, saying that Cuban officials learned of the episode late last month when the U.S. said that an embassy official felt ill after hearing "undefined sounds" in her home in Havana.
Cuba said in a statement that U.S. officials reported on May 29 that a female embassy official had experienced "health symptoms" after hearing sounds in her home two days earlier. Cuba said it sent investigators to the home who found no potential source.
In all, two individuals are considered "potentially new cases" but have not yet been "medically confirmed," a State Department official said. Doctors from the University of Pennsylvania have been evaluating, treating and studying Americans affected in Cuba last year.
6 terrorism suspects reportedly killed in Iran - Iran's official news agency said members of the powerful Revolutionary Guard have killed six terrorism suspects near the border with Iraq.
IRNA's Sunday report quotes Gen. Mohammad Pakpour, chief of the Guard's ground forces, as saying that his forces also injured three suspects in the incident Saturday.
He said the clashes happened at two locations in a Kurdish area as the suspects tried to cross the Iraqi border.
Syrian leader says West fueling war - Syrian President Bashar Assad said in an interview published Sunday that the West is fueling the devastating war in his country, now in its eighth year, with the aim of toppling him.
Assad told The Mail on Sunday that Western nations have lied about chemical attacks in Syria and supported terrorists groups there, while Russia has supported his government against the foreign "invasion."
Assad reiterated his long-held position that the uprising against his rule was part of a plot to remove a leader that did not go along with Western policies in the region.
Syria's conflict began in 2011, and has claimed nearly half a million lives.
Israel destroys land-to-sea tunnel - Israel destroyed a tunnel dug by Hamas leading from Gaza into the Mediterranean Sea intended for use by the Islamic militant group that rules the territory to carry out attacks, the military said Sunday.
Military spokesman Lt. Col. Jonathan Conricus said that last week aircraft struck a position belonging to Hamas' naval forces in northern Gaza that incapacitated its first-of-a-kind tunnel to the sea.
He said it was designed to allow divers to slip out of Gaza and attack Israeli targets.
Israel has placed a high priority on eliminating the tunnel threat since Hamas gunmen infiltrated Israel during the 2014 war. Although they did not manage to reach civilian areas, the infiltrations caught Israel off guard, with one attack killing five soldiers and terrifying the local population.
There was no immediate response from Hamas.
Advocate for Rohingya wins humanitarian prize - A lawyer from Myanmar who has worked to promote the rights of the country's persecuted Rohingya minority has been awarded the $1.1 million Aurora Prize for humanitarianism.
Kyaw Hia Aung on Sunday received the prize, which was established on behalf of Armenian survivors of a mass killing by Ottoman Turks.
An estimated 1.5 million Armenians were killed in 1915-23 in what many historians regard as the first genocide of the 20th century, a claim that Turkey vehemently rejects.
Aung, a lawyer, has worked for decades for Myanmar's Rohingya population. Some 700,000 Rohingya have fled to makeshift refugee camps in Bangladesh. He served 12 years in prison for his work, the foundation said.
The prize includes $100,000 for Aung and $1 million for him to donate to organizations of his choice.
Hurricane Bud growing in Pacific off Mexico - Hurricane Bud formed in the Pacific Ocean west of Mexico on Sunday even as former Hurricane Aletta was fading. Neither immediately threatened land, though Bud was expected to kick up high surf along the Mexican coast and potentially could reach the Los Cabos resort region by Thursday or Friday.
The U.S. National Hurricane Center said Bud had maximum sustained winds of 75 mph at midafternoon Sunday. It was centered about 255 miles south of Manzanillo, Mexico, and was moving northwest at 9 mph.
Forecasters said Bud likely would strengthen over the next few days but was expected to weaken back to a tropical storm once it reached the cooler waters near the Baja California Peninsula.
Meanwhile, Tropical Storm Aletta's winds were down to 45 mph. It peaked on Friday as a Category 4 hurricane.
Thousands attend anti-corruption rally in Romania - Some 3,000 protesters gathered in the Romanian capital to oppose official corruption a day after a massive government rally against anti-corruption prosecutors.
Demonstrators yelled "Justice, not corruption!" and lit up the sky with their mobile phones as night fell in Bucharest on Sunday.
More than 100,000 supporters of the center-left government rallied in the same spot Saturday, claiming anti-corruption prosecutors had too much power. The anti-corruption agency successfully prosecuted 713 officials in 2016, including 28 mayors and a senator.
Fire engulfs warehouse with Iraq's election ballots - A fire engulfed a depot on Sunday where ballots from Iraq's national elections were being stored ahead of a full manual recount, the latest setback for a process that had already been mired in accusations of fraud and other violations.
The blaze sent black plumes that could be seen for miles around the capital. There were fears that the destruction of ballots further risks the legitimacy of last month's election, which saw a major shift in Iraq's political order.
Saad Maan, a spokesman for Iraq's interior ministry, said the fire had broken out in one of four storage facilities for ballots, and that the three depots with the majority of returns had been spared.

Graphic

 
 Iraqi security forces guard ballot boxes after a fire that broke out at Baghdad's largest ballot box storage site, where ballots from Iraq's May parliamentary elections are stored, in Baghdad, Iraq, Sunday, June 10, 2018. The ballots are part of a manual recount of votes, mandated in a law passed by the Iraqi parliament last Wednesday. (AP Photo/Karim Kadim) 

Load-Date: June 13, 2018


End of Document