WORLD'S LEADERS PREPARE PLAN FOR AIR SAFETY;
 ANTI-TERRORISM WAR TOPS AGENDA AT SUMMIT OF GROUP OF EIGHT
St. Louis Post-Dispatch (Missouri)
June 26, 2002 Wednesday Three Star Edition


Copyright 2002 St. Louis Post-Dispatch, Inc.
Section: NEWS ; Pg. A5
Length: 486 words
Byline: Martin Crutsinger The Associated Press
Dateline: KANANASKIS, ALBERTA
Body


On the eve of their annual summit meeting, leaders of the world's top industrial countries prepared a joint plan to make air travel and cargo shipments safer from terrorism.
To underscore the cooperative theme, President George W. Bush put his signature Tuesday on a bill allowing the United States to participate in two U.N. terrorism initiatives.
Bush held one-on-one talks with Japanese Prime Minister Junichiro Koizumi and Canadian Prime Minister Jean Chretien. The president hoped to build support for his new Middle East peace proposal, which calls for the replacement of Palestinian leader Yasser Arafat as a condition for a Palestinian state.
Koizumi expressed strong support for the proposal, calling it "proactive" and saying it would get a lot of attention at the summit meeting.
The anti-terrorism war topped the agenda for the meeting of the industrial nations, known as the Group of Eight.
Canada's Chretien also hopes to focus on aid to Africa, the world's poorest continent. But U.N. Secretary-General Kofi Annan warned against what he called "unrealistic expectations" and "magic success."
The White House said leaders would also issue a joint plan on ways to make air travel and the transport of goods between their countries more secure, while allowing for the free flow of goods.
Chretien was the first leader to arrive on Tuesday at this remote resort, nestled in the Canadian Rockies. Leaders of the other G-8 countries - the United States, Russia, Japan, Britain, Germany, France and Italy - were arriving throughout the day at Calgary's airport. They were greeted by a Canadian honor guard before taking the 45-minute helicopter ride to the resort.
Koizumi waved his arms in appreciation of brilliant blue skies. He briefly donned his arrival gift - a white Stetson hat, symbolizing Calgary's cowboy heritage. Bush also got a white Stetson and also put it on.
Before leaving Washington, Bush signed legislation that allows the United States to participate in the two U.N. conventions. One would bolster efforts to prevent terrorist bombings; the other would choke off the flow of money to terrorist groups.
On his way to Canada, Bush stopped in Arizona to view the devastation of wildfires that have destroyed thousands of acres of forests in the West.
Annan and the presidents of four African nations were invited to join in the discussions on Africa. Those talks are expected to result in approval of an aid plan to boost support by billions of dollars for countries that carry out economic and governmental reforms.
But Annan cautioned against overblown expectations about what the summit could produce.
This year's summit was being held under heavy security, with thousands of soldiers deployed across an eight-mile wide security zone.
Last year in Genoa, anti-globalization demonstrators clashed with police, leaving one protester dead. This year, protesters are being kept miles away from the meetings.

Graphic

 
PHOTO; AGENCE FRANCE-PRESSE Photo - Japanese Prime Minister Junichiro Koizumi tries on a white Stetson as he arrives at Calgary International Airport in Calgary, Alberta, Tuesday to attend a summit of the Group of Eight. Stetsons were given to participants as a symbol of Calgary's cowboy heritage.

Load-Date: June 26, 2002


End of Document