WORLD DIGEST
St. Louis Post-Dispatch (Missouri)
September 29, 2012 Saturday
THIRD EDITION


Copyright 2012 St. Louis Post-Dispatch, Inc. All Rights Reserved
Section: NEWS; Pg. A15
Length: 544 words
Dateline: 0 
Body


Iran opposition leader sees rebirth
The leader of an Iranian militant group that was taken off the U.S. terrorism list on Friday says the move will change her group's "balance of power" with the world - predicting a higher profile in politics, fundraising and diplomacy as well as increased anti-regime activity in Iran.
The U.S. State Department said the People's Mujahedeen of Iran (MEK) hasn't committed terrorism for more than a decade. The decision means that effective immediately, any assets the group has in the United States are unblocked and Americans are permitted to do business with the organization.
Maryam Rajavi, the Paris-based head of the exiled opposition group, said in a rare interview that she hopes the organization can now have the ear of the world's diplomats to help bolster its bid to overthrow Iran's clerical regime. She stressed that its goal was to replace the Islamic Republic with a democratic government.
Rajavi praised the "courage" of U.S. Secretary of State Hillary Rodham Clinton for what MEK believes was a long-overdue decision.
Experts: Mayas prophesized, but not end of world - As the clock winds down to Dec. 21, experts on the Mayan calendar have been racing against time to convince the public the Mayas didn't predict an apocalypse this year.
Some experts are now saying the Mayas may indeed have made prophecies, just not about the end of the world.
Archaeologists, anthropologists and other experts are meeting in the southern Mexican city of Merida to discuss the implications of the Mayan Long Count calendar, which is made up of 394-year periods called baktuns.
Experts estimate the system starts counting at 3,114 B.C. and will have run through 13 baktuns around Dec. 21.
Mexican government archaeologist Alfredo Barrera said Friday that the Mayas did prophesize but perhaps about more humdrum events like droughts or disease outbreaks.
Kenya attacks last stronghold of Somali militants - Kenyan troops invaded al-Shabab's last stronghold in Somalia on Friday, coming ashore in a predawn beach landing at Kismayo that appeared likely to deprive the Islamist insurgents of their last big money-making enterprise.
African Union troops from Kenya, Uganda and Burundi have combined over the last 18 months to kick al-Shabab out of the capital, Mogadishu, and take a series of smaller towns that the insurgents fled to. By Friday afternoon, Kenyan Defense Forces said that its ground troops were also steadily approaching Kismayo from the west. Al-Shabab, which is allied with al-Qaida, had earned money by collecting taxes on goods arriving at the Indian Ocean port, so the loss of the stronghold would be a double blow to the armed fundamentalist group that began attacks in 2007 and ultimately controlled all but a few blocks of the capital.
Chevron pays $17 million fine for oil spill off Brazil - Chevron Corp. has paid a multimillion-dollar fine for several "irregularities" in connection with last year's oil spill off the coast of Rio de Janeiro, Brazil's National Petroleum Agency said.
The agency said in a statement that Chevron paid the $17.3 million fine last week for 24 of 25 irregularities detected. The statement did not provide details on the irregularities.
- For more international news, go to stltoday.com/nation.

Load-Date: December 5, 2012


End of Document