WORLD IN BRIEF;
French seek terrorism trial
The Atlanta Journal-Constitution
May 8, 1997, Thursday,
ALL EDITIONS


Copyright 1997 The Atlanta Constitution
Section: FOREIGN NEWS; Pg. 06B; Pg. 03B
Length: 722 words
Body


French anti-terrorism investigators said Wednesday that they had asked a court to try the brother-in-law of Libya's leader, Col. Moammar Gadhafi, and five other Libyan operatives in absentia next year on charges of blowing up a French airliner and killing 171 people over the Sahara in 1989.
The principal investigating magistrate in the case, Jean-Louis Bruguiere, previously accused Abdallah Senoussi ---Gadhafi's brother-in- law and the former No. 2 Libyan secret service official ---and three other Libyan agents of blowing up a DC-10 airliner of the now-defunct airline UTA.
French investigators said they believed that Senoussi had ordered the strike to retaliate against France for using its troops to resist a Libyan invasion of Chad.
 
EUROPE 'Shared elan' call
French President Jacques Chirac went on the political attack against his surging leftist opponents in his first public effort to win an electoral victory for his conservative governing alliance. When he called the election for a new National Assembly in April, 10 months ahead of schedule, Chirac said he hoped for a "new elan" in France. Wednesday, in a statement printed in 14 regional newspapers and pirated by several Paris papers, Chirac said France needs a "shared elan" and criticized the opposition Socialists' proposals for more government programs and less business privatization.
Slaves for drugs
Instead of paychecks, a dozen workers for a Portugese construction company in the northern city of Oporto received heroin and sometimes cocaine three times a day. But when police raided the drugs-for-work scheme on Sunday, they found a hellish scene. Workers were living on the construction site in a half-built, leaky, dirt-floor basement. "They were authentic slaves for their daily fix of heroin and cocaine," police Capt. Mario Antunes was quoted by the Lisbon daily newspaper Publico as saying.
 
MIDDLE EAST Exercises defended
Turkey defended its improved ties with Israel and said upcoming joint naval exercises were not aimed at threatening any other country. "Nobody should be disturbed by Turkey's expanding relations with Israel," Defense Minister Turhan Tayan said. Syria, Egypt and Libya renewed their criticism of the Turkey- Israel relationship this week after the two countries announced they were holding joint naval maneuvers in the Mediterranean. The United States also will join the exercises.
 
New peace talks
A U.S. envoy flew to Israel for talks with Prime Minister Benjamin Netanyahu and Yasser Arafat, looking for a way to break their two-month impasse in peace talks. Israeli news media said Dennis Ross would ask Israel to freeze settlement construction and ask the Palestinians to once again share intelligence information, which they stopped doing in March. Ross made no comment as he went into Netanyahu's office. He heads next to the Gaza Strip for talks today with Arafat. "There are efforts to create mutual trust," Israeli Foreign Minister David Levy said of Ross' shuttle diplomacy.
 
ASIA Volatile mix
An "abnormal chemical reaction" in radioactive waste being prepared for disposal may have caused a fire at a Japanese nuclear fuel reprocessing plant.  An interim report released by the Science and Technology Agency on Wednesday said changes in a nuclear waste and asphalt mixture may be responsible for the March 11 accident at Tokai, northeast of Tokyo, which exposed 37 workers to low-level radiation. An incorrect mixture of radioactive waste fluid and hot asphalt may have produced steam and caused the fire, the report said. The asphalt is used to solidify the waste for safer storage.
 
THE AMERICAS Volcano spits ash
Mexico's Popocatepetl volcano spit ash and steam in what scientists called two separate "regular intensity" events. Wind was expected to carry the ash to the states of Mexico and Morelos, vulcanologist Ramon Pena Melche told the official Notimex news agency. The moderate and regular release of energy by the volcano reduces the risk of a violent eruption, Pena said.
 
Police patrol
Jamaican soldiers and police patrolled an opposition stronghold in the capital after a 4-year-old boy was killed and several people were wounded in sporadic clashes. Fighting broke out Tuesday night between police and residents in the Tivoli Gardens area of West Kingston, an enclave loyal to the opposition Jamaica Labor Party.

Load-Date: May 14, 1997


End of Document