Worried About the Burden of Fighting the War on Terrorism
The American Banker
January 3, 2002, Thursday


Copyright 2002 American Banker, Inc.
Section: SUPPLEMENT: COMMUNITY BANKING JANUARY 2002: COVER STORY; Pg. 4A
Length: 1391 words
Byline: BY JOHN REOSTI
Body


Banks got their draft notices early in the war on terrorism.
Weeks before U.S. troops landed in Afghanistan, bankers were busy cross-checking customer names against suspected- terrorist lists provided by the Treasury Department and the Federal Bureau of Investigation. Federal officials wanted accounts held by individuals or groups on the lists frozen, and they wanted it done as soon as possible.
"We spent a great deal of time going through all our open accounts to see if we had any matches," Robert A. Homco the president and chief executive officer of Valley Commerce Bank in Phoenix, said in a Dec. 2 interview. "I've had people in here three Saturdays in a row. Last Saturday I had six people in here." (No matches were found.)
James E. Johnson, who served as under secretary of the Treasury for enforcement during the Clinton administration, said banks can expect to receive several more lists.
"There will be more . and my sense is that you will be held accountable," said Mr. Johnson, now a partner at the law firm of Morrison & Foerster LLP in New York, at a December symposium in Washington on fighting money laundering. "Those institutions that are not paying close attention to what is going on will be caught up in law enforcement actions."
Having banks scan accounts for suspected terrorists is only one aspect of a far-reaching campaign. The Uniting and Strengthening America by Providing Tools Required to Intercept and Obstruct Terrorism Act of 2001 - the "USA Patriot Act" - which President Bush signed Oct. 26 has 342 pages of measures aimed at shutting off the flow of money to terrorists and the organizations that support them. (See related story below.)
Bankers want to do their part to thwart terrorism, but many say some provisions of the new law are unnecessarily burdensome.
The Treasury Department estimated that the extra reporting would create a total of only 180,000 hours of work for banks. But last month a spokesman for $2.1 billion-asset Southwest Bank in St. Louis told the St. Louis Business Journal that it had taken a bank employee a full day to go through each of the terrorist lists received from the government.
That extra load promises to be heaviest for banks with a significant amount of international business, since much of the legislation is directed at policing overseas and cross- border operations.
The media have highlighted the act's ban on maintaining correspondent accounts for foreign shell banks, defined as institutions without a physical presence in any country.
And though few if any community banks have connections with a shell bank of any kind, the new law also establishes stringent reporting standards for companies that provide private or correspondent-banking services to foreign individuals, as well as for those that offer correspondent services to conventional foreign banks. Those clauses will probably affect community banks especially, according to industry experts.
Banks do have some say in the matter, though.
Aside from the prohibition on dealings with foreign shell banks, most of the provisions of the USA Patriot Act will not take effect until April. The interval serves as a comment period. The Treasury Department, which will write the regulations, has asked banks specifically for input on whether the reporting requirements are necessary and for suggestions on how to gather information on suspicious activities more efficiently.
Community banks are particularly likely to push for less stringent reporting standards. Money center banks have more extensive foreign dealings, but they also have larger staffs, so it would be much easier for them to handle another layer of regulatory requirements.
In an op-ed piece published last month in American Banker, Dennis E. Nixon, the chairman and CEO of $5.7 billion-asset International Bancshares Corp. in Laredo, Tex., suggested that the act's reporting requirements would be of limited value to law enforcement. Mr. Nixon said the regs would merely add to the already unmanageable amount of data that federal officials require banks to provide.
"Nationwide more than 12 million currency transaction reports are handed over by banks to regulators every year," Mr. Nixon wrote. "These reports track transactions of $10,000 or more. . Few are acted upon by law enforcement, clearly because of the sheer volume of information."
None of the thousands of currency transaction or suspicious activity reports that International Bancshares have filed over the years have led to a laundering investigation, Mr. Nixon said.
Mr. Johnson, whose eight years in the office of enforcement culminated in two years as under secretary, from 1996 to 1998, said that though individual reports almost never prompt investigations, they are useful law enforcement tools - and are almost certainly receiving extra scrutiny since Sept. 11.
John Byrne, the senior counsel for the American Bankers Association, said the USA Patriot Act includes a number of steps intended to make the reporting system more timely and effective. In particular, it mandates the creation of a real-time Web site that will let banks file suspicious- activity reports online instead of through the mail. "Those sections of the act haven't gotten much press," Mr. Byrne said.
The new law "won't cause problems from a small-bank perspective," he added. "The debate has got to shift to ways to make these laws more effective."
Roy Karon, the president of BVS Performance Systems, a Cedar Rapids, Iowa, contracting and consulting firm, said the best way to do that is to train bank employees to recognize suspicious transactions.
"They've got a big challenge ahead of them, and it is critical that they be prepared to meet the challenge," said Mr. Karon, whose firm is one of a number of bank consultants that rushed to offer training related to USA Patriot Act compliance.
"The key here is to get the banks to understand that .  banks are essential to shutting the terrorists down," Mr.  Karon said. If the financial system cuts them off, he said, "these guys will have trouble eating and sleeping."
BVS is presenting a series of free online seminars by its compliance expert, Jeffrey R. Torp. Among the topics is identifying less obvious countries where wire transfers involving terrorist funding originate.
For example, Mr. Torp said, though Somalia is not seen as a sponsor of terrorism, terrorists have been known to route funds through it, because of its volatile political situation and its proximity to Sudan.
"If you come across a wire transfer from Somalia, that ought to raise a red flag," Mr. Torp said.
Frederick M. Smith, the president of the Texas Bankers Association, said he feared that the USA Patriot Act's broad scope and the wide-ranging nature of its directives may make international banking difficult for small banks.
"We're concerned our ability to do business and serve our (foreign) customers might be hampered," he said. "We want to make sure the act doesn't take a sledgehammer to the banking industry - that it takes a scalpel to the problem and efficiently cuts out the wrongdoers."
A number of Texas banking companies, including IBC, have established strong ties with Mexican businesses and entrepreneurs since the passage of the North American Free Trade Act. And though the Texas-Mexican border seems far removed from the unfolding war on terrorism, the USA Patriot Act does not exempt those relationships, a fact that worries Texas bankers in particular.
"Mexican nationals may find this impinges on the way they've done business," Mr. Smith said. "If we confront them with a lengthy list of questions, they may throw up their hands and decide it just isn't worth it. Or maybe the banks will say the same thing. Either way, it would be a tragedy for both sides."
Mr. Homco is more optimistic. Fast-growing Phoenix is attracting a number of foreign investors and companies; Mr.  Homco was eager to capture their business before Sept. 11, and the new law has not changed his outlook.
"I wouldn't turn anyone away because of it," Mr. Homco said. "We're looking for any kind of good, legitimate business."
 Copyright c 2002 Thomson Financial. All Rights Reserved.

Graphic

 
photo, Robert Homco

Load-Date: January 2, 2002


End of Document