WORST-CASE SCENARIO PART 2: Severe weather, terrorism: Would you open home to refugees in an emergency?
The Dominion Post (Morgantown, West Virginia)
September 18, 2006 Monday


Copyright 2006 The Dominion Post
Distributed by McClatchy-Tribune Business News
Section: STATE AND REGIONAL NEWS
Length: 561 words
Byline: Mark Patrick Grandstaff, The Dominion Post, Morgantown, W.Va.
Body


Sep. 18--West Virginians have become increasingly concerned about the after-effects of potential emergency situations in nearby regions, such as the Pittsburgh area or Washington, D.C., said Shaunda Rauch, public information officer for the Monongalia County Office of Emergency Management.
"As people would be migrating away from D.C., they would absorb most of our resources very quickly," Rauch said. "We need to be prepared to be inconvenienced."
Rauch said that in such a situation, the office may ask Monongalia County residents to open their homes to refugees, and to open as many shelters as possible.
"A large population of people would be displaced very quickly. We would ask our citizenry to show hospitality to other people who are in need," Rauch said.
To help residents be prepared for disaster, The Dominion Post is continuing its three-day series on the "Family Disaster Plan ... A Step-By-Step Guide," produced by the office and the Monongalia County Health Department. Today is the second installment.
If hazardous materials are released into the atmosphere, the office recommends a procedure called "shelter-in-place." What that means, according to the "Family Disaster Plan" document, is to select a small, interior room with few or no windows, and take refuge within it.
Shelter-in-place is not the same as going to an emergency shelter, and it does not mean that an entire building needs to be sealed off. It is important to take a radio with you to remain in contact with local authorities while sheltered.
"Hazardous materials in the atmosphere" implies terrorism, these days, but there are many other reasons the air might become unsafe in Monongalia county, Rauch said. Chemical trucks could spill on Interstate 68 or 79, or at the airport, she said.
"Many of the things we may face would be purely accidental," Rauch said, "but the aftermath and consequences would be just as severe as if it would be deliberate."
There are very few hazards to which Monongalia County is not susceptible, Rauch said. Severe thunderstorms and floods have always been a concern.
There are many consequences to consider in the event of a flood, said Shelley Martin, public health educator for the health department.
Once flood waters recede, they are often contaminated with sewage and chemicals, Martin said. The waters go through people's gardens, which might make garden-grown fruit and vegetables unsafe to eat. Soaked carpets and furniture can become a sanitation hazard, Martin said.
"If it's deemed necessary, we provide tetanus shots," she said.
Damage from minor floods can sometimes be prevented by keeping gutters and ditches clear, Martin said.
"We've always been involved in flooding response," she said. "Now, we're trying to be more proactive."
Today's material from the plan includes information about terrorism and taking shelter at home, at work, or in an automobile. It also includes information about severe weather conditions and how to take inventory of personal possessions.
Tuesday's installment will cover a possible influenza pandemic.
Copyright (c) 2006, The Dominion Post, Morgantown, W.Va. Distributed by McClatchy-Tribune Business News. For reprints, email tmsreprints@permissionsgroup.com, call 800-374-7985 or 847-635-6550, send a fax to 847-635-6968, or write to The Permissions Group Inc., 1247 Milwaukee Ave., Suite 303, Glenview, IL 60025, USA.

Load-Date: September 18, 2006


End of Document