WOULD-BE JETLINER BOMBER PLEADS GUILTY; PROSECUTORS STUNNED AT TRIAL'S QUICK END
Pittsburgh Post-Gazette (Pennsylvania)
October 13, 2011 Thursday
SOONER EDITION


Copyright 2011 P.G. Publishing Co.
Section: NATIONAL; Pg. A-1
Length: 907 words
Byline: MONICA DAVEY, THE NEW YORK TIMES
Body


DETROIT -- The trial of a man accused of trying to blow up a commercial airliner with a bomb sewn into his underwear ended Wednesday, just a day after it had begun, when Umar Farouk Abdulmutallab announced that he would plead guilty to all of the federal counts against him.
Prosecutors and federal agents seemed stunned, if pleased, and declared that the plea was evidence that the U.S. court system, as opposed to a military tribunal, could bring a suitable outcome to a terrorism case.
Anthony Chambers, a legal adviser assigned to Mr. Abdulmutallab, who was representing himself in court, said he was disappointed with Mr. Abdulmutallab's decision, but that it was his choice.
Almost two years after fellow passengers flying aboard Northwest Airlines Flight 253 watched in panic and confusion as smoke and flames rose from Mr. Abdulmutallab's lap, he pleaded guilty to eight crimes, including conspiracy to commit an act of terrorism, attempted murder and attempted use of a weapon of mass destruction.
He was offered no deal from prosecutors in exchange for his plea. He faces sentencing in January, but prosecutors said the nature of some of the crimes to which he pleaded guilty automatically required a life sentence with no chance of parole.
The choice appeared less a strategic legal calculation than an opportunity for Mr. Abdulmutallab, who has described himself as an al-Qaida member and who prosecutors say conspired in his plan with other al-Qaida members, to make a public statement certain to reach a wide audience.
After telling Judge Nancy G. Edmunds that he was indeed pleading guilty to each count against him, Mr. Abdulmutallab read a statement he had written saying his behavior may have violated U.S. law, but that it was in keeping with Muslim law, and that his efforts to harm Americans were retribution for U.S. acts around the world.
"I attempted to use an explosive device, which in the U.S. law is a weapon of mass destruction, which I call a blessed weapon to save the lives of innocent Muslims, for U.S. use of weapons of mass destruction on Muslim populations in Afghanistan, Iraq, Yemen and beyond," Mr. Abdulmutallab, a 25-year-old Nigerian citizen, said quietly and calmly.
In repeated appearances in court, Mr. Abdulmutallab, the well-educated son of a wealthy family, has almost seemed to have two personas: a polite, silent observer who appeared small at the defense table, and an unruly onlooker who would suddenly yell out messages of support for Osama bin Laden and Anwar al-Awlaki, a leading figure in an al-Qaida affiliate in Yemen, who was recently killed by a missile from a U.S. drone.
"If you laugh at us now," he said during his open-court statement that went on for several minutes Wednesday, "we will laugh at you later."
On Dec. 25, 2009, after almost eight hours of flying from Amsterdam, the plane was preparing to land in Detroit when a loud pop sounded from among the passengers. Some among the nearly 300 passengers quickly turned to Mr. Abdulmutallab, whose odd, specially designed undershorts were clearly burning.
As a chaotic scene unfolded, and the smoke grew thicker, passengers grabbed him from his seat, flight attendants extinguished the blaze, and pilots made an emergency landing at the airport near Detroit.
The jarring end of a trial that had been expected to last a month drew praise from prosecutors, federal agents and other authorities. Many of them said the results offered a definitive counterpoint to critics who had argued for several years that terrorism cases -- including this one -- ought to be handled within a military system. Prosecutors here said this case had proven that civilian court should remain an option.
In Washington, U.S. Attorney General Eric H. Holder Jr. issued a statement on the verdict: "Contrary to what some have claimed, today's plea removes any doubt that our courts are one of the most effective tools we have to fight terrorism and keep the American people safe.
"Our priority in this case was to ensure that we arrested a man who tried to do us harm, that we collected actionable intelligence from him, and that we prosecuted him in a way that was consistent with the rule of law."
All along, Mr. Abdulmutallab's trial had been expected to reveal far more than had been publicly known up about his ties to al-Qaida, to Mr. Awlaki, the U.S.-born cleric, and to the individual who provided him with an assignment to blow up a plane. Any detailed testimony about Mr. Awlaki and his role in the attempted bombing of Northwest 253 had been likely to draw particular interest. But with the trial over, such details now appeared unlikely to emerge -- at least here.
Asked to elaborate on the al-Qaida ties, Barbara L. McQuade, U.S. attorney for the Eastern District of Michigan, declined Wednesday to go beyond the broad outlines that had already come out in court.
In his own statement, Mr. Abdulmutallab talked specifically of Mr. Awlaki, but said little more than what was already known about their relationship: that he had listened to tape recordings of Mr. Awlaki. "I was greatly inspired to participate in jihad by the lectures of the great and rightly guided mujahideen who is alive, Sheik Anwar al-Awlaki, may Allah preserve him and his family and give them victory," he said.
Some Flight 253 passengers had been called to testify in the trial in coming weeks. A few seemed puzzled by the case's swift end, but also relieved to leave the episode behind.

Graphic

 
PHOTO: Bill Pugliano/Getty Images: Attorney Anthony Chambers speaks with the media after his client, Umar Farouk Abdulmutallab, known as the underwear bomber, pleaded guilty to all charges against him Wednesday at the Federal Courthouse in Detroit, Mich. Mr. Abdulmutallab, a 25-year-old Nigerian man accused of attempting to blow up Northwest 253 flight as it was landing in Detroit on Christmas day in 2009, is scheduled for sentencing Jan. 12.

Load-Date: October 14, 2011


End of Document