WOULD LYNCHING BE CALLED TERRORISM TODAY?;
 A NEW BOOK TAKES A SEARING LOOK AT OUR PAST
St. Louis Post-Dispatch (Missouri)
January 20, 2002 Sunday Five Star Lift Edition


Copyright 2002 St. Louis Post-Dispatch, Inc.
Section: A&E; Pg. G8; REVIEW - BOOK - NONFICTION; "AT THE HANDS OF PERSONS UNKNOWN"; BY PHILIP DRAY
Length: 793 words
Byline: Lester Kenyatta Spence Special To The Post-Dispatch
Body


"At the Hands of Persons Unknown"
By Philip Dray
Published by Random House, 528 pages, $35
"Southern trees bear a strange fruit,
Blood on the leaves and blood at the root,
Black body swinging in the Southern breeze,
Strange fruit hanging from the poplar trees.
Pastoral scene of the gallant South,
The bulging eyes and the twisted mouth,
Scent of magnolia sweet and fresh,
And the sudden smell of burning flesh!
Here is a fruit for the crows to pluck,
For the rain to gather, for the wind to suck,
For the sun to rot, for a tree to drop,
Here is a strange and bitter crop."
-- Lyrics from "Strange Fruit"
The song above is one of Billie Holiday's most memorable -- and her most poignant, her most upsetting. The "strange fruit" referred to are the hanging black bodies that too often adorned trees in the South -- lynched black men. Given its ubiquitous presence in popular culture, in personal accounts, and in old Southern newspapers, it may be surprising to note that lynching's role in American history really has never been adequately addressed.
When students are asked what they think about when they hear the term "Jim Crow," most mention segregated restaurants, drinking fountains and public spaces. Few mention violence in general, or lynching in particular.
Such a gap in knowledge shows that lynching represents a particularly difficult subject, even within the overall framework of racism and race relations. But although this gap can be understood, it is nigh impossible to understand not only racism, but states' rights, American culture and terrorism, without grappling with the tremendous and terrible role lynching has played in American history.
Into this gap steps Philip Dray with "At the Hands of Persons Unknown." Dray's work represents a groundbreaking attempt not only to address lynching but also to place it in a larger context. Not only does he deal in great detail with the violent crimes (which include more than hangings), but he also situates them in the center of Southern culture rather than on the periphery. Lynchings were so common that one took place, on average, every week between 1882 to 1944, according to records at the Tuskegee Institute that Dray studied for this book.
The author shows how lynchings often were tied to the "protection" of white womanhood. Edward Coy, for example, was roasted alive after his white lover was compelled to make charges of rape against him in order to save herself from a similar fate.
But other issues were at stake as well, issues of white economic and political power. In one case, three black store owners were lynched because a white store owner -- threatened by the competition they represented -- trumped up charges used to murder them. In another case a black postmaster was killed along with his infant daughter because he was appointed postmaster against the wishes of whites in his community.
Though it could be argued that these incidents were unusual or illegal, Dray points out that lynching was, in effect, sanctioned by local and state lawmakers, police and the media. Men were lynched not just in the dead of night, but often during the day. In many cases, lynchings of black men were akin to public performances -- replete with joyous celebrations and picnics attended by white men, women and children.
Dray's work is not only a powerful contribution to the literature on American history and culture, but also to our knowledge of the civil rights movement. The creation of the National Association for the Advancement of Colored People cannot be properly understood without examining the role that lynching played in its origin and early activity. Booker T. Washington's conservative politics cannot be properly understood without analyzing his hands-off approach to the subject.
Finally, the role of seminal individuals such as Ida B. Wells, arguably shunted off to the side in many accounts of American history in general and African-American history in particular, come to light. Again, as lynching was a central component of terrorist activities against blacks, it only makes sense that black activists were forced to define themselves by their responses to it.
Dray's work is scholarly and yet accessible to a wide range of readers. This work is difficult to read, however. Not difficult as in confusing or wordy, but as in exhausting. Dray pulls no punches in this work: In order to convey to the reader how barbaric this practice was, he had to deal with it graphically.
Given our country's new focus on terrorism, and our increased patriotism, it may be helpful to consider the role of terrorism here in order to move to a more mature form of patriotism that leads us to change reality rather than just live in it. "At the Hands of Persons Unknown" would be an excellent way to begin.

Notes

Books; Lester Kenyatta Spence is an assistant professor of political science at Washington University.

Graphic

 
PHOTO; PHOTOS; (1) Philip Dray shows the connection of lynching in the United States not only to racism but also to states rights, American culture and terrorism. Here, a mob prepares to hang Miller Mitchell in Excelsior Springs, Mo., in 1925. Mitchell was accused of attacking an 18-year-old white girl. The photo was copyrighted in 1925 by the Kansas City Journal-Post.; (2) Cover of book "At the Hands of Persons Unknown"

Load-Date: January 20, 2002


End of Document