WTF CLASSES
The Pan American: University of Texas - Pan American
June 2, 2011 Thursday


University Wire
Copyright 2011 UWIRE via U-Wire All Rights Reserved
Section: NEWS; Pg. 1
Length: 985 words
Byline: Karen Antonacci
Body


UTPA offers a handful classes over the first summer semester meant to teach students about the world around them through unconventional or controversial means. Not every student's schedule is filled with basic English or sociology classes. Some devote time to learning about vampires or terrorists.
BLOODTHIRSTY FOR LIT CRIT
ENG 2308 is a sexy class.  As a class studying vampires throughout literature, it was pretty much a given.
"Vampire literature has a lot of sexual overtones, and a lot of homosexual overtones too," said Professor Barbara Vielma, who has taught the course for 15 years. "When some of this was written, in the 18th and 19th centuries, homosexuality was a crime punishable by hanging, so no one was coming out. Vampire literature is a way to look at the society around it; it reflects fears and motifs."
The class is no debate on Team Edward versus Team Jacob, however. Vielma, who will retire after this semester following a 27-year career at UTPA, takes her class on a journey into the vampire genre to explore not only the sexual tones but also the feminist, Marxist, historical and psychoanalytical critiques present in the stories.
"The first day of class I tell them, 'If you're here to learn how to sparkle, or learn about 'Twilight' or 'True Blood,' this is not the class for you,'" Vielma noted. 'If you think I'm teaching it because I believe in vampires, this is not the class for you. If you think I'm going to teach you how to be a vampire - No.  I'm here to entice you in and then hit you over the head with literary criticism."
And entice them she does, using unconventional literature that is interesting to students, and lends to her assertion, "One day in my class and I'll have you being an English major, or at least a minor."
Sophomore Vanessa SantaMaria agrees wholeheartedly.
"I love that we don't have to read the same old stories and it's interesting every step of the way," SantaMaria said.
"My favorite was one by Anne Rice called 'The Master of Rampling Gate'. It was a more modern version of a vampire story and for the first time it was a good love story," Santa Maria said.
"Most people try to avoid topics about sexuality and homosexuality but here we face them head on.  I think it's something that more teachers should do," the psychology major from Alamo said. "More students would pay attention because it's something that they are interested in and willing to listen to, and the conversations would definitely catch their attention."
Vielma said that some of her students' parents don't understand the vampire class and SantaMaria is no exception.
"I didn't tell my family because they look down on this class," SantaMaria said. "They believe we should read classics and do the whole Old School thing. They don't think it's very educational. They don't understand that you can learn just as much in this class as any other English class."
Despite some of their parents' misgivings, Vielma said her course is thoroughly enjoyed and helps students look closely at what they see around them.
"They always email me afterwards that they can never go see a vampire movie again or read a vampire book without sitting there and analyzing it. It drives friends and relatives crazy," she laughed.
THE (WORLD'S) WAR ON TERROR
While Vielma's students learn about why the vampire genre becomes popular around the turn of the century, students in CRIJ 4322 are learning about the similarities between bomb tactics used by Al-Qaeda and the Mexican drug cartels. You see, the criminal justice course covers the definition, the categories, the methods, and the media of terrorism - both foreign and domestic.
Professor Philip A. Ethridge, who has been teaching this course for five years, said it's beneficial to students who want to go into law enforcement along the border.
"If (students are) starting out in nontraditional criminal justice, or in law enforcement, you may have to decide whether something is a terrorist attack - a bombing, an arson," he explained. "When you look into it and find out what the target is, then you can say well this was or wasn't a terrorist attack. Especially here along the border, with the things down here the way they are, a lot of things like these may happen."
Two of Ethridge's goals for his students are to broaden their view of terrorism as a global problem, and drill home the idea that there are incidences of terrorism occurring many times every day.
"One of the biggest things is, sadly, there are thousands and thousands of attacks every year," he said. " We analyze them, and then go around the world and we talk about areas like Central America, South America, Northern Ireland, Israel, and then Afghanistan and Iraq."
A class on terrorism faces problems a regular history or sociology offering might not, however.  According to Ethridge, many terrorist organizations now film their crimes and upload them to the WEeb for use as recruiting tools. Videos like these are part of the class, but stipulations have to be made.
"I had a class one time where as part of their presentation they said, we're going to show a (video of a) bombing... and there was a guy riding his bicycle up the street, he rode back and then the bomb goes off and he's just gone," Ethridge recalled. "Someone in the front row about fainted because, you know, it set in. So then I had to say, if something's going to happen like that, let us know. Some of this stuff...you need to be careful. It's pretty raw stuff."
As troublesome as some of the material may be for the students, many wonder how Ethridge can calmly explain about the raw hate that fuels much of terrorism.
"Students say, 'How can you teach this? We blow up people every day, and you talk about all these terrible things everyday.' I never looked at it that way," Ethridge said.
"I'm teaching something. It's gruesome, but what I'm trying to do is tell them what's out there; that they need to be aware."

Load-Date: October 28, 2015


End of Document