WVU secures $1.7 million for anti-terrorism program Joint project with Guard gets first of federal funds Shootout at Shawnee Park
Charleston Gazette (West Virginia)
March 15, 2001, Thursday


Copyright 2001 Charleston Newspapers
Section: News; Pg. P1A
Length: 454 words
Byline: Tara Tuckwiller
Body


tara@wvgazette.com  
Maybe anthrax in the New York subway. Maybe a bomb under the Golden Gate Bridge. But sometime within the next 10 years, somebody will unleash a weapon of mass destruction on the United States, federal officials predict.
When that happens - before it happens - West Virginia will be the place people turn. West Virginia University has secured $ 1.7 million in federal money to develop the National Training Center for Weapons of Mass Destruction, headquartered at the Camp Dawson National Guard center in Preston County.
It is the first money to be spent on the center, although WVU and the West Virginia National Guard have been working on smaller anti-terrorism programs for a couple of years. The money is being used to hire Electronic Data Systems Inc., a contractor that will put together the complicated electronics the center will need.
"Senator [Robert C.] Byrd realized that these two efforts in West Virginia could work together," said Rusty Russell, director of WVU's virtual medical campus, which will be part of the center.
Byrd, D-W.Va., has dwelt on the need to combat terrorism since a TWA jet full of Americans was hijacked to Beirut in 1985. Byrd has also battled presidential vetoes, from Presidents Reagan through Clinton, on his repeated efforts to pump money into Camp Dawson.
To put it simply, WVU will create a huge electronic network for people who have to deal with the aftermath of terrorist attacks - police, paramedics, firefighters and emergency room doctors, to name a few. The network will make all kinds of useful information and training available to those people in an instant, wherever they are.
"For example, we'll have a database of all kinds of chemical and biological agents, and how to respond to those," Russell said. "Right now, we're identifying the people who have that knowledge and figuring out how to centralize it."
About 50 WVU staffers, from microbiology to rural medicine to electrical engineering, are lending their expertise to start the center.
The WVU half of the center will be kept afloat by several federal agencies, Russell said.
WVU's contractor, EDS, will organize the massive amounts of information and keep it safe from prying enemy eyes.
"You're dealing with sensitive data," EDS Vice President Gary Yenser said. "You have to be able to reach out and touch the right information when you need it. … And when you're dealing with medical things, you've got complicated imagery you've got to move around. It's pretty advanced."
Camp Dawson has a $ 19 million center already under construction, where disaster-responders such as the military and police will meet for anti-terrorism training.
To contact staff writer Tara Tuckwiller, use e-mail or call 348-5189.

Load-Date: March 15, 2001


End of Document