WYOMING NO LONGER SHELTERED FROM WAR ON TERRORISM
Wyoming Tribune-Eagle (Cheyenne, WY)
October 22, 2001 Monday


Copyright 2001 Cheyenne Newspapers, Inc.
Section: Front; Pg. A1
Length: 641 words
Body


The fight against terrorism hit home here in a big way Sunday when it was announced that a soldier from Cheyenne was killed Friday in the first American ground action of the war in Afghanistan.
Jonn J. Edmunds, 20, died during what appears to be a Black Hawk helicopter accident, as did another young man from Montana. Three others were injured.
No longer can the people of Wyoming feel insulated from the fight.
Sure, many of us have said since Sept. 11 that a terrorist attack could happen here or that anthrax could be in the mail at our local post office.
But did we really believe it? After all, the experts have said -- correctly -- that the odds were infinitesimal that any form of terrorism would hit Wyoming.
But who would have thought that a young man from Wyoming, not even 21 years old, would be among the very first casualties of what could be a very long war?
Yet it's true.
There can be little doubt that the Edmunds family is devastated, as are family, friends and even former teachers and classmates from East High School. As should be the people of Wyoming.
From all reports it appears Edmunds was a model student who entered the armed forces with the goal of eventually going to college. He also is a hero, a man who died for his country as it fought back against the most egregious acts of evil in the history of mankind -- the toppling of the World Trade Center's Twin Towers and the attack on the Pentagon.
But Edmunds' death should serve as a reminder, too, that war is about the loss of real human lives, people who have hopes and dreams like the rest of us and who leave those unfulfilled on the battlefield.
Many Wyomingites in recent weeks have called for immediate armed action against the Taliban and Osama bin Laden. But even as we have pushed for action and said we understood the cost, it is doubtful that any of us realized it all would hit this close to home this soon.
One of our own -- a Wyoming native, a graduate of a local high school, a young man who took part in Boys State, who played soccer here, who called Cheyenne home -- is dead.
That is no small matter. The dying has begun right here in Wyoming. Many other families and states across the nation will be counting similar costs in the weeks and months to come.
One can only hope this death will make all of us a little less flippant about the price that will be paid before the war on terrorism is over. Those of us who remember the war in Vietnam surely remember the human cost -- more than 50,000 lives -- though the immediate pain of that has been dulled by the years.
Particularly offensive in recent weeks have been those on talk radio -- both nationally and locally -- who have called for savage strikes and major action against the Taliban without seeming to measure the cost of that kind of action.
One has to wonder if it were their sons or daughters -- or even themselves -- on the line whether they would be quick to argue for dropping in ground troops or turning the Afghan mountains into desert.
Perhaps the death of Edmunds will calm at least the local rhetoric a bit.
No doubt, this war on terrorism is just, and it needs to be fought with the full fury that the American military can mount.
But it is important to keep everything in perspective, including the value of human life. These are not just markers on maps; they are flesh and blood men and women who have mom and dads and hometowns like Cheyenne.
It is right that we grieve today for Jonn Edmunds, one of our own. And we must appreciate his sacrifice. As his family and friends surely understand, it came at no small price.
D. REED ECKHARDT is the managing editor. If you have thoughts on this column or anything else in the Tribune-Eagle, please contact him at: D. Reed Eckhardt, Wyoming Tribune-Eagle, 702 W. Lincolnway, Cheyenne, WY 82001; or at (307) 633-3125; or at reede@wyomingnews.com.  

Load-Date: November 22, 2001


End of Document