Y2K TERRORISM
IS UNCLE SAM TELLING US TO DUCK AND COVER?
Wyoming Tribune-Eagle (Cheyenne, WY)
December 27, 1999, Monday


Copyright 1999 Cheyenne Newspapers, Inc.
Section: Opinion; Pg. A10
Length: 405 words
Body


An Algerian accused of trying to smuggle nitroglycerin and other bomb-making materials into the United States from Canada has raised questions about the crucial tasks of government to ensure the security of its citizens.
It's a valid concern.
Democrats and Republicans alike regularly boast that the United States is the only superpower, unrivaled in its ability and willingness to project military power and influence around the globe. But what does this swaggering global dominance have to do with ensuring the security and safety of the Republic and its citizens?
Despite the global power of the United States, the U.S. government fails in its most basic task -- ensuring the protection of its citizens. According to the State Department's report on global terrorism, the United States alone is the target for 40 percent of the world's terrorism. That hefty share is unusual for a nation that has no civil war, domestic insurgency or unfriendly neighbors.
Why is the United States the target of terrorism? Those in Washington will tell you the answer is because of our country's unique leadership responsibility. What they are trying to say is that America sticks its nose where it doesn't belong sometimes.
The foreign policy apparatus inside the Washington Beltway -- which looks at the world as if it is a chessboard -- is reluctant to curb its voracious appetite for military escapades. For example, bombing Serbia, even though the nation in no way threatened the United States, and continuing to pound the economic rubble that is Iraq.
But what does the average American get from the U.S. meddling in far-flung corners of the world that don't remotely affect U.S. vital interests? A much lighter wallet and an increasing uneasiness when traveling at home and abroad.
Yes, the American public has reason to be concerned. The bombings of the World Trade Center and the American embassies in Kenya and Tanzania indicate that terrorists are now more willing than ever to inflict mass slaughter in retaliation against an interventionist U.S. foreign policy.
The possibilities that something will happen in Cheyenne are remote, but not impossible. Most terrorists and the rogue states that sponsor them are far away from American shores and would not bother the United States if it didn't constantly meddle in foreign regions.
If the federal government makes any kind of New Year's resolution, it might want to reevaluate its foreign policy.

Load-Date: January 11, 2000


End of Document