Yeltsin doesn't share in support for strikes
St. Petersburg Times (Florida)
August 22, 1998, Saturday, 0 South Pinellas Edition


Copyright 1998 Times Publishing Company
Section: NATIONAL; U.S. TARGETS TERROR; Pg. 9A
Length: 450 words
Body


Russian President Boris Yeltsin, angry that he was not given advance notice  of the U.S. missile strikes on targets in Afghanistan and Sudan, said Friday  that he was outraged by the attacks.
Russian officials later tried to soften his remarks and said next month's  Moscow summit between Yeltsin and President Clinton would proceed on schedule.
Elsewhere in Europe, however, leaders generally supported the raids, and  even those who appeared uneasy defended the right of a country to  counterattack terrorists.
Compiled from Times WiresWORLD REAX
Yeltsin, speaking at an airport outside the Arctic Circle city of Murmansk,  was furious: "My attitude is indeed negative, as it would be to any act of  terrorism, military interference, failure to solve a problem through talks. I  am outraged and I denounce this."
Yeltsin's spokesman, Sergei Yastrzhembsky, later said that the United  States and Russia "are in the same boat as far as the struggle against  terrorism is concerned" and that Russia understands how much suffering the  Aug. 7 bombings of U.S. embassies in Africa caused.
Asked about Yeltsin's complaints, the national security adviser, Samuel  Berger, told reporters in Washington that no foreign leaders were consulted in  advance of the attacks because of the need to maintain secrecy.
Chancellor Helmut Kohl of Germany, a friend of Clinton and one of the  United States' most consistent allies, was among the president's effusive  supporters Friday. The German government "supports all measures to combat  terrorism," he said.
Leaders from most other Western European nations, among them Britain, Spain  and Austria, characterized the U.S. attacks as a justifiable defense.
Even the French government, which has quarreled repeatedly with the United  States over the threat of military action against Iraq, seemed ready to  support the White House. Though the French Foreign Ministry issued a somewhat  chilly statement Friday morning that it had "taken note" of the missile  attack, Prime Minister Lionel Jospin was more explicitly supportive.
Tony Blair, the British prime minister, praised the United States. "I hope  that everyone will understand that the USA must have the right to defend  itself against terrorism," he said while on vacation Friday in the south of  France.
In Kabul, the Afghan capital, Lt. Col. Carmine Calo, 42, an Italian working  for the U.N. Special Mission for Afghanistan, was shot Friday when armed men  fired on a U.N. minibus. Another passenger in the bus, Eric Labertu, a French  official at the U.N. mission, also was shot. Reports indicated their condition  was not critical.  - Information from the Washington Post and New York Times was used in this  report.

Graphic

 
COLOR PHOTO; Russian President Boris Yeltsin

Load-Date: August 24, 1998


End of Document