YELTSIN VOWS TO TAKE QUICK ACTION IN BLASTS;
HE BLAMES TERRORISM THAT "HAS NO FACE"; OTHERS POINT TO CHECHEN REBELS
St. Louis Post-Dispatch (Missouri)
September 14, 1999, Tuesday, FIVE STAR LIFT EDITION


Copyright 1999 St. Louis Post-Dispatch, Inc.
Section: NEWS, Pg. A5
Length: 737 words
Byline: From News Services
Dateline: MOSCOW
Body


A second apartment-house bombing led Russian President Boris Yeltsin to promise Monday that the authorities would take "tough, swift and decisive" action against terrorism.
Indeed, Yeltsin said that terrorism "has declared war on us." But he stopped short of imposing a national emergency.
Monday's blast destroyed an eight-story building at No. 6 Kashirskoye Highway, leaving not a single room standing. The bomb went off at 5 a.m.
Officials said that at least 73 people were dead but that dozens more were feared lost under the rubble.
Authorities said the building had housed 142 people; when the bomb went off, about 30 were away from home.
The site is on Moscow's southern side, about four miles from the explosion in another apartment building that killed 94 people on Thursday.
Monday's bomb went off on a national day of mourning for victims of the earlier explosion and a third in the restless province of Dagestan.
Most of those injured by Monday's explosion were in neighboring buildings hit by debris. Rain and dust hampered efforts to dig under the tons of smoldering rubble.
Authorities said the bomb apparently had been planted on the first floor. They are looking for a man named Mukhit Laipanov, who apparently had rented space in both of the buildings hit by bombs.
The Dagestan blast happened on Sept. 4, when a car bomb killed 64 people, most of them family members in a military officers housing area.
Yeltsin took to television to describe Monday's attack as terrorism. He said, "This enemy does not have a conscience, shows no sorrow and is without honor. It has no face, nationality or belief. Let me stress - no nationality, no belief."
But others were quick to point a finger at Chechen rebels, who have recently fought Russian soldiers in neighboring Dagestan. The rebels crossed over into Dagestan last month and declared plans to form an Islamic state.
The fighting has been intense; the Russian government reported Monday that it had lost 180 soldiers since the conflict began.
Journalist Vyacheslav Izmailov has been in Chechnya and told a television interviewer Sunday that the Chechen fighters had laid a plan to strike back at Russia through bombings.
Izmailov said he had reported to Russian authorities that the Chechens had filtered "groups of terrorists" into Russian cities to plant bombs. One law enforcement source said Izmailov's remarks were being taken seriously.
Moscow Mayor Yuri Luzhkov also blamed Chechens. In the Chechen capital of Grozny, the government issued a statement denying responsibility for the blasts.
Yeltsin urged tightened security and told deputies to organize a response. He ordered harsher security measures at airports, nuclear power stations, oil pipelines and other potential targets. And he gave Moscow Mayor Yuri Luzhkov 24 hours to have all 30,000 residential buildings in the city searched for explosives.
But Yeltsin stopped short of declaring a national emergency, which could be the equivalent of imposing martial law.
Many politicians have warned against any such action. They fear it could be used as a pretext for calling off December's parliamentary elections.
The blasts are the latest and most frightening example of the security breakdown in a country that until a decade ago symbolized the modern authoritarian state.
In Soviet times, security invariably took precedence over individual freedom. Borders were sealed, the streets were safe at night and terrorism was something that happened in other countries.
The massive security apparatus was adept at hounding dissidents and instilling fear in ordinary citizens. But it had little experience in preventing, investigating or solving actual crimes.
Today, the security forces appear as helpless bystanders to the carnage. With rare exceptions, the police, army and other security agencies have failed to halt the challenges to state authority, which include terrorism, rebel incursions and high-profile contract killings.
Russia still has one of the largest prison populations in the world - about 1 million people are behind bars - and the government promises tough action against crime.
But the police and the Federal Security Service - the main successor to the KGB - are ill-equipped to deal with the wave of crime and chaos that has followed the Soviet breakup.
Like every other government agency, the security services are woefully short of resources. Policemen are poorly paid and are widely seen as corrupt.

Graphic

 
PHOTO (1) THE ASSOCIATED PRESS Photo - A view of the ruins of an eight-story apartment building destroyed by an explosion in Moscow early Monday. The bomb went off on a national day of mourning for victims of an earlier explosion.
 (2) THE ASSOCIATED PRESS Photo - Three Moscow residents at their window near the apartment building demolished in Monday's blast. Most of those injured in the fatal explosion were in neighboring buildings hit by debris.

Load-Date: September 14, 1999


End of Document