Yemen's ties to terrorists worry West
Pittsburgh Tribune Review
July 11, 2010 Sunday


Copyright 2010 Tribune Review Publishing Company All Rights Reserved
Length: 994 words
Byline: Betsy Hiel
Body


SAN'A, Yemen -- After the 9/11 attacks, Western governments worried about how an unstable Yemen contributed to world terrorism. 
Those concerns faded with time but renewed when Umar Farouk Abdulmutallab, a Nigerian with ties to Yemen, tried to bring down an American jetliner over Detroit on Christmas Day 2009. 
In the months before and since that foiled attack, still other connections have surfaced between Yemeni radicals and terrorist attacks or plots in the United States and elsewhere. 
Yemen's foreign minister, Dr. Abubaker Abdulla Al-Qirbi, believes the failed Christmas attack "was a blessing in disguise" because it "alerted the world to the dangerous situation, not only in Yemen, but in the region as a whole." 
Analysts have long warned of Yemen's imminent collapse. Yet this strip of desert and mountains, separating Saudi Arabia from the Gulf of Aden, somehow lurches on. 
About 65 percent to 70 percent of its 23 million people are younger than 25; unemployment is estimated at 35 percent. The country consistently sits near the bottom of world socio-economic rankings. 
Yemenis are scattered across 150,000 mostly remote settlements, making it difficult to provide basic needs such as roads, education and water, Al-Qirbi says. 
Oil reserves -- once more than 80 percent of the national budget -- have dwindled to half that as global oil prices have fallen, he adds. 
Along the streets of this coastal city, billboards proclaim "No to Weapon Smuggling" and "No to Human Smuggling." 
The political realm is no better. 
Yemeni President Ali Abdullah Saleh likens ruling his tribal land to "dancing on the heads of snakes." 
Some government officials privately hold little hope for a recent cease-fire with northern rebels; marginalized southern separatists continue to agitate against Saleh's regime. 
About 2 p.m. each day, work stops here so Yemenis can buy bundles of qat and chew the leafy stimulant while debating their lot in life. 
The ubiquitous narcotic plant is yet another national problem: Its cultivation is depleting Yemen's limited water supply. 
Targeting a terrorist  
In this volatile mix, al-Qaida in the Arabian Peninsula -- AQAP to counter-terrorism officials -- has flourished, carrying out attacks here and claiming credit for several in the United States. 
President Obama has approved the targeted killing of AQAP's putative head, Anwar Al-Awlaki. The U.S.-born Muslim cleric of Yemeni heritage is thought to be hiding here. 
Top U.S. officials link Awlaki to the 2009 shootings at the Army's Fort Hood and to the Christmas bombing attempt. 
Yemeni officials want to handle Awlaki under Yemeni law. 
"If the U.S. provides us with proof ... then we will deal with him," vows Rashad Al-Alimi, deputy prime minister for defense and security. "He is now a fugitive." 
Western analysts believe Awlaki's powerful tribe is protecting him and that hunting him would be politically explosive for Yemen. 
Mohammed Al-Qadhy, a U.S.-educated member of Yemen's national parliament, calls the U.S. targeted-kill order "a mistake" and illegal under U.S. law. 
Besides, he says, it has made Awlaki "a prominent figure." 
"No one knew him before. Now, he is very, very popular." 
'I see 20 Yemens'  
Publisher Faris Al-Sanabani sits in the offices of his newspaper, the Yemen Observer, and magazines, Yemen Today and Arabia Felix. 
U.S.-trained and charismatic, he considers it unlikely the country will split north and south, as it was before a 1990s civil war. 
He envisions something worse. 
"(If) things become horrible and the economic situation becomes devastating, I see 20 Yemens, not two. I see a Yemen of the Taliban ... of al-Qaida ... of the sheikhs ... of the sultans ... of the pirates -- you name it," Al-Sanabani says. 
At a qat-chewing party in Mohammed Al-Qadhy's home, fellow parliamentarian Abdullah Ali Al-Khulaki details the woes of his restive southern province, Lahij. 
Unemployment and poverty are high, and he admits that southern separatists and al-Qaida operate there. 
"I want us to sit together at one table and discuss what we all need -- Yemen is for all of us," he says, stuffing qat leaves into his cheeks. "If the government doesn't do anything ... there will be more problems." 
"Al-Qaida is a problem, there is no doubt. ... But that we are all al-Qaida here in Yemen is not true," he insists. 
He calls the terrorist organization "the devil of all the world" and lists the countries where its cells are found, from Saudi Arabia to America, before adding: "America spent $300 billion in Afghanistan, and they (al-Qaida) are still there." 
Foreign Minister Al-Qirbi does not think al-Qaida is growing in Yemen, but he is concerned about countering it. 
"If one looks at the roots of radicalization, it is lack of education, poverty and unemployment ... the frustration of the young people who graduate from university and can't find jobs. 
"Unfortunately, this has been neglected in our fight against terrorism. We've always focused on the military and intelligence side." 
U.S. dollars help to train Yemen's counter-terrorism unit and newly formed coast guard. A $121 million civilian aid program targets remote areas where al-Qaida's threat is greatest. 
Yet Al-Sanabani calls the U.S. assistance "peanuts" compared to that from the European Union and gulf states. 
Still other of the country's problems come from outside its borders. 
In the southern coastal town of Aden, regional governor Adnan Al-Jifri says Somali refugees are a burden. 
About 700,000 of them are here, according to government officials. Some fled Somalia's civil war, which erupted in the early 1990s; others use Yemen as a steppingstone to Saudi Arabia or Europe. 
Western analysts worry about the link between al-Qaida's Yemeni arm and Somalia's Al Shabab, another terrorist group linked to al-Qaida. They fear militants use the cover of refugees to move from place to place. 
"The Somali problem hasn't been given its due importance by many countries," Al-Qirbi says. 

Load-Date: July 11, 2010


End of Document