Yemen leader asks for drones; They would boost efforts against militants, he says
The Tampa Tribune (Florida)
August 24, 2013 Saturday


Copyright 2013 Times Publishing Company All Rights Reserved
Section: NATION & WORLD; NationWorld; Pg. 7
Length: 276 words
Byline: The Associated Press
Dateline: SANAA, Yemen 
Body


 - A suicide car bomb killed two soldiers Friday at a checkpoint in Yemen's south, officials said, as the country's leader made public his request to the United States for drone technology to boost local efforts against militants.
A security official said six soldiers were also wounded in the attack, with the bomber blowing up his explosives-rigged car after he was stopped at a checkpoint at the entrance to the city of Shibam in Hadramawt province. The official spoke on condition of anonymity following official guidelines.
The attack had all the hallmarks of al-Qaida's Yemeni branch, but there was no immediate claim of responsibility. Washington considers the branch one of the world's most dangerous terrorist groups.
President Abed Rabbo Mansour Hadi told police cadets on Thursday that U.S. drones have carried out attacks in Yemen in accordance with an agreement to combat terrorism signed by the United States and former Yemeni President Ali Abdullah Saleh after the Sept. 11 attacks.
Cooperation (with the U.S.) in the field of combating terrorism is not a secret as we take part in the operation room in Djibouti and we have officers in Bahrain's operation room with other world countries, he said, adding drone hits have widely curtailed al-Qaida activities.
Hadi said he asked Washington on his trip there this month to provide Yemen with drones. Yemenis are smart. They will learn fast, he said on state TV. 
There has been a drone strike spike since late July targeting al-Qaida. 
The drone program is run by the Pentagon's Joint Special Operations Command and CIA. The military flies drones out of Djibouti, the CIA out of a Saudi Arabian base. 

Load-Date: September 25, 2013


End of Document