Yemen's President Says Government Is Willing to Talk to Disarmed Qaeda Fighters
The New York Times
January 11, 2010 Monday
Late Edition - Final


Copyright 2010 The New York Times Company
Section: Section A; Column 0; Foreign Desk; Pg. 5
Length: 709 words
Byline: By STEVEN ERLANGER
Dateline: SANA, Yemen 
Body


Yemen's government is ''determined to stand up to the challenges'' of Al Qaeda, but will be willing to talk to any Qaeda follower who ''renounces violence and terrorism,'' said the country's president, Ali Abdullah Saleh, in an interview broadcast late Saturday night.
  Mr. Saleh is under great pressure from the United States to act to crush Al Qaeda in the Arabian Peninsula, which has found refuge in lawless parts of Yemen and which took responsibility for the effort to bomb an American airliner headed for Detroit on Dec. 25.
  In the interview with Abu Dhabi TV, Mr. Saleh, 67, vowed that his security services would hunt down those Qaeda members who refused to renounce violence. But ''dialogue is the best way,'' he insisted, ''even with Al Qaeda, if they set aside their weapons and return to reason.'' He said that Yemen is ''ready to reach understanding with anyone who renounces violence and terrorism.''
  While apparently anodyne, Mr. Saleh's comments were viewed with some skepticism by Western diplomats here. He has run Yemen for more than 30 years, and he has remained in power by balancing tribal, religious and political powers and often buying their loyalty -- and that includes radical Islamic leaders as well as Al Qaeda.
  The United States has complained that Yemen struck deals in the past with Qaeda followers and released them from prison for promises of peace, while some have returned to terrorism or later traveled to Iraq to fight against American forces. A large group  involved in Al Qaeda's attack on the American Navy destroyer Cole in 2000 escaped from a high-security prison in February 2006, reportedly with help from the security services. Two of them who evaded later government raids against the group have become key figures of Al Qaeda, including its leader here, Nasser al-Wuhayshi.
  Washington was also angry when President Saleh released from house arrest one of the Cole masterminds, Jamal al-Badawi, whom Yemen refused to extradite to the United States.
  Washington is concerned that some of the Yemenis detained at Guantanamo Bay and  suspected of involvement with the Taliban and Osama bin Laden will not be kept in custody if they return home and pretend to give up terrorism. Last week President Obama  suspended the release of Yemeni detainees from Guantanamo, where they make up nearly half the current prison population of some 200 people.
  Despite the growing concern from the United States, Mr. Obama said in an interview with People magazine last week that he had no intention of sending American troops there, or to other trouble spots like Somalia.
  ''I have no intention of sending U.S. boots on the ground in these regions,'' he was quoted as saying. ''I have every intention of working with our international partners in lawless areas around the globe to make sure that we're keeping the American people safe.''
  Mr. Saleh has used Yemenis who went to fight the Soviet Union in Afghanistan to support his own government in a 1994 civil war and as government fighters against a tribal rebellion in the north. He has tended to leave the jihadists, including Al Qaeda, alone if they do not pose a threat to his government, something that Gregory Johnsen, a Princeton University expert on Yemen, has called ''a tacit nonaggression pact.'' 
  Diplomats have said that only when Mr. Saleh was shown intelligence that Al Qaeda was taking aim at his government and his family did he take the threat of Al Qaeda seriously.
  Yemeni officials have argued that, as in Saudi Arabia, reconciling with Qaeda fighters and extremists is necessary, and that Yemen's friends should understand the need for reconciliation. Last week, Deputy Prime Minister Rashad al-Alimi, who is in charge of security, said 600 veterans of the Afghan war of the 1980s and later conflicts there have gone through a rehabilitation program with clerics and officials and ''are now good citizens.''
  The Yemeni foreign minister, Abu Bakr al-Qirbi, conceded last week that the government had concentrated on the rebellion in the north and secessionists in the south, hoping that Al Qaeda would lie low. ''I think our fault was that maybe we should spare Al Qaeda in the last year,'' he told CNN. ''But Al Qaeda took advantage of that.''

http://www.nytimes.com

Load-Date: January 11, 2010


End of Document