Yemen Court Acquits 19 Charged With Terrorism Plot
The New York Times
November 5, 2006 Sunday
Late Edition - Final


Copyright 2006 The New York Times Company
Section: Section 1; Column 1; Foreign Desk; Pg. 16
Length: 273 words
Byline: By HASSAN M. FATTAH
Dateline: DUBAI, United Arab Emirates, Nov. 4 
Body


An appeals court in Yemen on Saturday acquitted 19 people suspected of being members of Al Qaeda on charges of conspiring to commit terrorism; six were convicted on lesser charges of possessing forged documents. 
  The defendants, including five Saudis, had been charged with plotting attacks against United States interests in Yemen on behalf of Abu Musab al-Zarqawi, the former terrorist leader in Iraq who was killed in June. The state security court acquitted the men in June, but the Yemeni prosecutor challenged the court's verdict on appeal.
The presiding appeals court judge said Saturday that there was insufficient proof that the men collectively made up an armed unit, quashing the basis of the case. However, he found six of the men, including one Saudi, guilty of possessing forged passports and other official documents. 
  Two of the men, both Yemeni, were sentenced to three-year terms, and the rest were sentenced to time served and were released. 
  The trial was one of several highly publicized cases involving people suspected of being Qaeda members in Yemen this year, part of the government's crackdown on militants. 
  When the initial trial opened in February, most of the men expressed either sympathy or allegiance to Al Qaeda, and acknowledged having fought in Iraq. The men joked with the judge, who promised to make their stay in prison easier and noted their objections to how they were being treated. 
  Militants in Yemen may only be charged with crimes committed in there. Membership in Al Qaeda is technically not illegal, while involvement in Iraq's insurgency is seen as outside the jurisdiction of the courts.

http://www.nytimes.com

Load-Date: November 5, 2006


End of Document