Yesterday's terrorist
St. Petersburg Times (Florida)
January 21, 1994, Friday, City Edition


Times Publishing Company
Section: EDITORIAL; EDITORIALS; Pg. 16A; EDITORIAL
Length: 584 words
Body


It's possible for yesterday's terrorist to turn into today's statesman.  Nowhere is that transformation more likely to occur than in the Middle East,  where Jews and Arabs alike often have felt justified to resort to terror as a  tactic in the fight to win and maintain their freedom.
Former Israeli Prime Ministers Menachem Begin and Yitzhak Shamir were  leaders of a notoriously violent underground group that fought for the  creation of a Jewish state in the 1940s. Neither man was transformed into a  visionary political leader in his later years, but each became a respected  head of state who renounced terrorism and embraced the concept of peaceful  coexistence in the Middle East.
ASSAD
President Clinton has now staked a good chunk of his administration's  credibility on the belief that Syrian President Hafez Assad is prepared to  make a similar metamorphosis. Because the cause of Middle East peace is so  important, Assad should be given a chance to prove the sincerity of the  conciliatory words he offered Israel after meeting with Clinton this week.
Given Assad's history, though, American, Israeli, Arab and Palestinian  leaders should watch their backs in the meantime.
Under Assad, Syria has earned its place on the State Department's official  list of terrorist states. When not directly involved in its own destabilizing  mischief in Lebanon and elsewhere, Syria has been the primary state sponsor of  shadowy terrorist groups responsible for some of the most heinous political  crimes of this century.
The United States hasn't always been eager to determine just how deeply  involved in terrorism Syria might still be. For example, our government has  found it more convenient to ignore considerable evidence of Syria's complicity  in the 1987 bombing ofPan Am Flight 103 over Lockerbie, Scotland, preferring  instead to focus on the Libyan government's apparent involvement in that  attack.
U.S. officials have tended to cast Assad in the most favorable light  possible because they realize that Israel and its Arab neighbors will never  enjoy a genuine peace until Syria decides to become a constructive part of the  process. Assad has teased the world many other times over the past 23 years,  but his recent words and actions represent his most encouraging overture yet.
Perhaps he has been stirred to action by seeing the Palestinian community  and other Arab governments begin to make their own tenuous peace with Israel  without him. Assad is capable of spoiling things, but his best chance of  solidifying his stature as a pan-Arab leader is to move to the forefront of a  peace process that began without him.
Assad has an opportunity to make peace on terms that allow him to claim an  important victory. Israeli Prime Minister Yitzhak Rabin already appears to be  preparing his country to make "difficult decisions," including returning the  Golan Heights to Syria in exchange for a comprehensive and enforceable peace  agreement.
Regaining that crucial piece of land lost in the 1967 war is the incentive  that would lead most Syrians to the peace table. For Assad, though, the real  goal may be to assert a role of pre-eminence that neither he nor any other  Arab leader has been able to claim since the humiliation of the 1967 war.
Before he's given another inch of land or stature, though, he should be  forced to offer much more than vague promises in return. Israel's security and  the Clinton administration's credibility are too valuable to be left  vulnerable to Assad's whims. 

Graphic

 
BLACK AND WHITE PHOTO; Syrian President Hafez Assad

Load-Date: January 25, 1994


End of Document