You shoot five people, you're a terrorist
USA TODAY
September 27, 2016 Tuesday
FINAL EDITION


Copyright 2016 Gannett Company, Inc. All Rights Reserved
Section: NEWS; Pg. 6A
Length: 300 words
Body


Facebook
Arcan Cetin, 20, a Turkey native, was taken into custody Saturday night and charged in the deadly rampage that killed five in a mall in Burlington, Wash.
Despite rumors about Islamic terrorism, authorities said during a news conference late Saturday that there is no evidence of the shooting being terror-related.
If you walk into a Macy's and kill five people, it's terrorism. Plain and simple. Prayers out to the families who are suffering with this tragic loss. It's time we take back our country and restore peace and law.
Rich Farrell
I don't think the shooter's motivation was terrorism. I think he's mentally ill. He faced a judge in December. Why didn't he get help for his mental illness then? The judge could have had him involuntarily committed or at least ordered a psychiatric evaluation. He had a judge's order not to own a gun, which didn't do that much good. People who have protective orders against them should not have access to guns. Seize the guns; don't just tell them to turn them in. Go to the house with a bomb-sniffing dog, then find and seize any arms. If he'd been locked up when he faced the judge, instead of being told to promise to be a good boy, this shooting wouldn't have happened. His father is lucky to be alive. If we don't get serious about getting treatment for those mentally ill, we will continue to see these tragedies.
Cynthia Queen
It looks like this guy is a crazy young man with a gun, and they come in all colors and backgrounds. However, most are white, Christian boys who are crazy and have a gun. Look at mass murders in this country, most of the time it's white guys for some reason.
Wayne Gregersen
We have enough problems in America, we certainly don't need to import more. The current administration is completely ignoring our concerns.
Rachel Austin 

Load-Date: September 27, 2016


End of Document