You Can Say That Again
Richmond Times Dispatch (Virginia)
September 8, 2010 Wednesday
Final Edition


Copyright 2010 Richmond Newspapers, Inc. All Rights Reserved
Section: EDITORIAL; Pg. A-07
Length: 618 words
Body


Cogent commentary from around the country. 
 If Mr. Gingrich, Ms. Palin, or any who claim their problem with the so-called "Ground Zero Mosque" is not one of religion but location want to prove themselves, I have a simple suggestion: Come with me to Tennessee. Or California. Or Wisconsin.
 Because there are mosque projects on hold in all those places, too - held back by hate, pure and simple.
 In Murfreesboro, hundreds of people recently marched in protest of plans to build a Muslim community center. In Temecula, protestors have picketed the Muslim community's Friday prayers. In Sheboygan, a group of pastors have led a fight to keep Muslims from establishing a mosque in an abandoned health-food store.
 Are these protests also a result of the Islamic community's insensitivity to the larger community's needs? Why haven't Ms. Palin
and Mr. Gingrich defended the rights of Muslims across the country if they're so comfortable with Islam?
 - Russell Simmons,| The Wall Street Journal|
***************
 As someone who's called Islamophobic and homophobic every day of the week, I can't help marveling at the speed and skill with which Muslim lobby groups have mastered the language of victimhood so adroitly used by the gay lobby. . . . 
 "Homophobia" was always absurd: People who are antipathetic to gays are not afraid of them in any real sense. The invention of a phoney-baloney "phobia" was a way of casting opposition to the gay political agenda as a kind of mental illness: don't worry, you're not really against same-sex marriage; with a bit of treatment and some medication, you'll soon be feeling okay.
 On the other hand, "Islamophobia" is not phony or even psychological but very literal - if you're a Dutch member of parliament or British novelist or Danish cartoonist in hiding under threat of death or a French schoolgirl in certain suburbs getting jeered at as an infidel whore, your Islamophobia is highly justified.
 But Islam's appropriation of the gay lobby's framing of the debate is very artful. It's the most explicit example of how Islam uses politically correct self-indulgent victimology as a cover. You'll recall that most Western media outlets declined to publish those Danish cartoons showing the Prophet Mohammed.
 Thus, even as they were piously warning of a rise in bogus "Islamophobia" - i.e., entirely justified concerns over Islamic terrorism and related issues - they were themselves suffering from genuine Islamophobia - i.e., a very real fear that, if they published those cartoons, an angry mob would storm their offices.
 It was a fine example of how the progressive mind's invented psychoses leave it without any words to describe real dangers.
 - Mark Steyn, America Alone
***************
 [M]ost Muslims who commit terrorist acts make political rather than theological arguments. They perceive the U.S. government as being at war with Muslims. That doesn't justify the atrocities that terrorists commit. But as Robert Pape, in particular, has documented, it is foreign occupation that motivates most terrorists. And today Muslim lands are most likely to be seen as dominated by the U.S. and its allies.
 In fact, those Americans angered by Cordoba House should recognize the problem of blowback. The mere thought of a mosque near Ground Zero infuriates them, but they expect Muslims in other lands to smile benignly as Washington bombs, invades, and occupies their lands, and captures or kills their peoples. Again, nothing justifies terrorism. But that doesn't prevent U.S. government policies from inadvertently encouraging terrorism. The issue is not how we see our government's intentions, but how others perceive our government's actions.
- Doug Bandow, The Huffington Post

Load-Date: September 9, 2010


End of Document