You could see this coming Nostradamus prophecies and terrorism-related tomes climb the charts
Charleston Gazette (West Virginia)
September 23, 2001, Sunday


Copyright 2001 Charleston Newspapers
Section: Life; Pg. P3F
Length: 586 words
Byline: Robert K. Elder Chicago Tribune
Body


IF the mass media are a reflection of the American mindset, then recent sales of books, music and videos reveal a country swelling with pride, historical curiosity and paranoia.
In the wake of the attacks on the World Trade Center and the Pentagon, "Nostradamus: The Complete Prophecies," by John Hogue, topped Amazon.com's best-sellers list last week. It was followed by "Twin Towers: The Life of New York City's World Trade Center," by Angus Kress Gillespie, and "The New Jackals: Ramzi Yousef, Osama Bin Laden and the Future of Terrorism," by Simon Reeve.
Four of the books on Amazon's top-10 list are related to Nostradamus, the 16th-century French writer of prophecy. According to some scholars, the French physician may have predicted, in his famous quatrains, World War II and the assassination of John F. Kennedy.
The 1981 documentary "The Man Who Saw Tomorrow" held the top spot in video sales on Amazon. Narrated by Orson Welles, "The Man Who Saw Tomorrow" dramatizes Nostradamus' life and prophecies. Five other titles based on Nostradamus held spots on the Amazon VHS top-10 list.
"Anything that has Nostradamus in the title people are buying. I'm told all of them at all of our stores are sold out," said Lori Hile, area spokeswoman for the four Borders Books and Music stores in Chicago.
Books on terrorism and anti-terrorism efforts were also selling well.
For example, "Body of Secrets" (Doubleday) by James Bamford, a study of the ultra-secret National Security Agency and its post-Cold War efforts to refocus on the battle against terrorists, jumped to 18th place Monday on the Amazon.com best-sellers list. That was an increase of 461 percent over the book's ranking the day before at No. 101.
Also selling well was Bamford's 1982 book on the agency which, as of Monday afternoon, was the 159th best-selling book at the online bookstore.
But the higher sales were bittersweet for Bamford since they were due to the Sept. 11 tragedies. "If I could have my druthers, I'd settle for fewer sales and more lives," Bamford said.
CDs containing "America the Beautiful," "God Bless America" and the national anthem are also reportedly selling well, as are newspapers, Tom Clancy spy novels and New York photography books.
"Bibles are selling better than usual," Hile said. "I suppose both for comfort and the apocalyptic messages that are found in Revelations."
On the Amazon.com best-sellers list, one edition of the Holy Quran, known more commonly as the Koran, had risen to 229th as of Monday afternoon.
Video rentals of the "Die Hard" trilogy and "The Siege" with Denzel Washington - movies related to terrorism - are moving quickly off the shelves at video stores.
Anika Lee, manager of a Blockbuster Video store in Chicago, reported several requests for "The Man Who Saw Tomorrow," and said customers "have been asking for that like crazy."
Joyce Quirico, manager of Video Shmideo in Chicago, also said she's received multiple requests for the documentary, which the store does not carry.
Patrons of Chicago's 57th Street Books have inquired about "Blowback: The Costs and Consequences of American Empire" by Chalmers Johnson.
"Basically they are interested in policy. 'Manufactured Consent' [by Noam Chomsky] is another people are interested in, and general histories of the Middle East and terrorism," said 57th Street Books' Gail Hilliard.
"Not many people are interested in conspiracy theories here. They are looking for more academic titles on American foreign policy - re-examining how we got to where we're at."

Load-Date: September 24, 2001


End of Document