You, Too, Can Help Combat Terrorism
Intelligencer Journal/New Era (Lancaster, Pennsylvania)
May 7, 2010 Friday


Copyright 2010 Lancaster Newspapers, Inc.
Section: A; Pg. 7
Length: 469 words
Byline: Editorials
Dateline: Lancaster, PA 
Body


The story behind the failed Times Square terrorist bombing seems to be ever-changing.
The suspect acted alone. No. He had some help from the Taliban. No. He had a lot of help from the Taliban. Authorities doggedly pursued the suspect. No. Authorities lost track of him as he made his way to JFK. The suspect wasn't on the no-fly list. Yes, he was.
The one incontrovertible fact, though, is the defining role two ordinary citizens played in foiling the bombing plot and helping bring the alleged plotter into police custody.
It was Lance Orton, a T-shirt vendor, and Duane Jackson, a handbag seller, who first became suspicious of the Nissan Pathfinder parked on the busy street where they conduct their business.
Jackson, a 58-year-old Vietnam War vet, said he started watching the car after it had sat running for 10 minutes with no owner in sight.
Orton, 56, also a Vietnam-era vet, likewise spotted the vehicle and thought it out of place.
When the two saw smoke seeping out of the SUV and heard popping noises as it idled, they alerted police.
Bomb-squad members found the vehicle rigged with firecrackers, propane tanks, gasoline and a non-explosive grade of fertilizer - a crude but potentially deadly bombing device that they promptly defused.
The action of the two street vendors - and mounted police officer Wayne Rhatigan, who was the first officer on the scene - helped avert disaster and saved perhaps hundreds of lives.
U.S. Attorney General Eric Holder praised the street vendors, as well as law enforcement officials, who made a relatively quick arrest in the case.
The bombing attempt, he said, serves as a reminder of the "constant threat from those who wish to do us harm."
Holder's comment was not meant just for law enforcement, but for everyday people, who can do as the two street vendors did and play an important role in keeping their communities and the nation safe.
Sean Basinski, director of the Street Vendor Project of the Urban Justice Center, said street vendors "know their blocks. If something is amiss, they'll know."
Much the same can be said of factory workers, who know their plant grounds, or teachers, who know their school yards, or any adults who know their neighborhoods.
The two vendors did what other Americans should do, given the opportunity. They got involved.
"That's what we should be trying to accomplish today in the context of homeland security," says Prof. Joseph Ryan, who teaches criminal justice at Pace University. "Do you want to see this nation survive? If you do, then everyone needs to be involved."
Police can defuse a bomb. Security cameras can help to locate suspects. But the power of each is enhanced many times when citizens' tips point police, and cameras, toward suspicious activity.
Orton, a reluctant hero, said it most succinctly: "See something, say something."

Load-Date: May 7, 2010


End of Document