Youngstown State U. profs explain allure of terrorism
University Wire
October 9, 2001


Copyright 2001 The Jambar via U-Wire
Length: 814 words
Byline: By Henry Gomez, The Jambar
Dateline: Youngstown, Ohio
Body


Sexy.
Allured by thoughts of young women rewarding them … or throughts of martyrdom … or thoughts of an eternal life after death, many young people can easily be persuaded to commit terrorist acts, students and professors said.
Terrorism is caused by several factors, the director of Youngstown State University Peace and Conflict Studies theorizes -- most of which involve young students "seduced" by the thought of belonging.
With air strikes Sunday signaling the next step in the war on terrorism, Dr. Keith Lepak, associate professor, political science, acknowledged that terrorist groups often look for students -- and students are often looking for what the groups promise.
Youngstown State U.
"Young people want to do something. They're looking for an adventure," said Lepak, when asked how one becomes a terrorist.
Lepak said many young people -- particularly students -- are na ve and can be easily turned on by the ideological movements of a terrorist organization.
"Some terrorist groups have a way of appealing to certain forms of idealism in the young. Perceptions of religion get mixed up," he said.
Noting issues such as race, religion and sociology, students said young people are attracted to terrorism by ringleaders who appeal to the beliefs young people often have on those issues.
"I think becoming a terrorist takes strong feelings toward a certain cause, and a strong leader that can convince people to do anything they want," said Deena DeVico, junior, political science. "Just like Hitler was able to convince Nazis that killing Jewish people was OK."
Dan Procopio, junior, marketing, said terrorists are conditioned at a young age, victims of their upbringing and political surroundings.
"They learn to hate," Procopio said. "That hate turns into obsession."
Lepak agreed upbringing and surroundings play a role in spawning terrorism.
"Apart from idealism, there's a broad social reality -- where many people have no values," Lepak said. "Violence appeals to them. It becomes attractive."
DeVico said no matter how strong her beliefs, she does not think she would ever be compelled to use violence as a means to an end.
"I don't think I hate anyone enough to kill them. I also think it takes a certain lifestyle, I guess," she said, acknowledging life in the United States is different than life in regions where terrorist groups such as Taliban and the Irish Republican Army, among others, have become popular.
DeVico represented YSU at an international Model United Nations conference this past summer in The Netherlands, and mentioned the Egyptian students acted "nationalistic and antagonistic" toward Americans.
"But that's just the way they have been taught to think about Americans," DeVico said.
Lepak said other countries feed on the naivete of its students, appealing to their sense of acceptance.
"Young people are targeted to be suicide bombers. They become heroes and celebrities to their peers," he said.
Said DeVico, "These people know they have short life expectancies, and they become heroes in their culture if they commit these acts."
Procopio said he believes many terrorists are victims of "blind faith."
"There is wrong guidance," Procopio said. "I heard that [terrorists suspected in the Sept. 11 attacks] were told that Allah had 50 virgins waiting for them if they killed all those people."
But just because students here in the United States have strong opinions against terrorism from other countries, it does not mean they act totally different, Lepak said.
"Protest movements often develop [to start terrorism from other countries]. They often rely on the enthusiasm of young people," Lepak said. "Actually, much of this is like the energy of anti-war students here."
Procopio disagrees.
"Well that is a different situation," Procopio argued. "That is a bunch of people who protest a certain cause, but when someone comes along and riles everyone up and starts fighting, then it gets out of hand. I don't think violence should be demonstrated for a cause you want to happen."
A colleague of Lepak's, Dr. David Porter, associate professor, political science, and director of the Global Education Program, has said another way young people are targeted is through the Internet.
While Lepak noted the accessibility of terrorist materials through the Web and through literature, he said terrorists such as Osama bin Laden, the suspected mastermind of the Sept. 11 terrorist attacks, start out their organizations with family and then channel their efforts toward those impressionable -- students.
"Part of it is family-based. You have to look at the social structure of societies where terrorism develops," Lepak said. "Part of the terrorism network system is extended family or those who they trust. Like any secret society, they exert a seductive effect on young people."
(C) 2001 The Jambar via U-WIRE

Load-Date: October 9, 2001


End of Document