YOUR LETTERS
Dayton Daily News (Ohio)
December 11, 2008 Thursday


Copyright 2008 Dayton Newspapers, Inc.
Section: OPINIONS; Pg. A23
Length: 699 words
Body


Alter deserves an asterisk
There is often talk of adding an asterisk to athletic records to indicate different circumstances; Barry Bonds' home run record and alleged steroid use is a prime example.
Alter High School won the Division IV state championship on Nov. 28 with an overall record of 13-2, and if ever a record deserved an asterisk, it is this one. Alter's two losses came at the hands of its coach, who forfeited the team's first two wins after realizing he played an ineligible student.
Coach Ed Domsitz could have ignored the error. After all, who would ever check to see that one ineligible player had been in the game for a few plays? The coach could also have argued that the two games had been won by such a significant margin that one player could not have made a difference in their outcome.
Instead, this man followed the rules and forfeited the wins.
In today's atmosphere of pro athletes taking illegal drugs, parents fighting and taking legal action over Little League and other junior sports, and overpaid athletes complaining about how they've been disrespected by management, fellow players, or even fans, it is important that we acknowledge someone who did what was right, despite the consequences.
Domsitz' "lead by example" action did more for sports and sportsmanship than any state championship ever won, and makes him a better role model than any pro athlete. That deserves at least an asterisk, for all the right reasons.
Tom Walters
Sugarcreek Twp.
Muslims must speak out
The recent massacre in Mumbai of so many innocent people, including several from the United States, by despicable Islamic terrorists has received considerable attention and condemnation by various leaders of the world, including the U.S.
In order to root out Islamic terrorism, there should be unified condemnation and outrage from the leaders and peace-loving Muslims of the world who reject terrorism to solve national and international grievances. They should be made to realize that the Islamic terrorists are also killing innocent peace-loving Muslims in different countries, and not just Hindus, Christians and Jews.
As long as terrorist groups continue to receive safe haven, training, arms, and logistical, financial and moral support from sympathizing Muslims, it will be very difficult to eliminate such violent and destructive terrorism.
In the meantime, countries like the secular democratic India, with its more than 150 million Muslims residents, should work on strong preventive measures, such as effective homeland security, anti-terrorism intelligence, rapid and coordinated response efforts, as well as the elimination of domestic Islamic terrorist sympathizers and cells. 
Jnanedra K. Bhattacharjee
Oxford
Pearl Harbor belongs on front page
I would like to thank the Dayton Daily News for once again forgetting our country's veterans. How on earth could the DDN not mention Pearl Harbor on its Dec. 7 front page?
That is a shameful, inexcusable disgrace, in my opinion. It is a slap in the face to those World War II veterans and all who have served since that infamous day in history (Dec. 7, 1941). Are we going to forget about them also?
The Darke Countian newspaper in Greenville remembered Pearl Harbor on its front page. The DDN could learn something from it, especially about remembrance and patriotism.
Walter J. Dudek
New Madison
Christmas isn't about buffalo
When the buffalo first appeared at the entrance to The Greene, I wondered - Why buffalo in Beavercreek?
Then several days later, the "Happy Holidays" sign showed up. That mystified me. When did the buffalo become a symbol for the holiday season? What is the significance?
The Santa symbol at least brings a personal touch to "Happy Holidays." The young can get warm, fuzzy feelings about Santa. And toys are bought in his name. "Happy Holidays" at least lasts as long as the toys. Happiness often goes when the toys break and the bills come due.
The only true "Happy Holiday" comes from acknowledging the one whose birthday this season was intended to celebrate. From his birth in a manger, to his death on a cross, to the Resurrection and new life... Now there's a "Happy Holiday" that lasts forever.
Grace Hockenberry
Kettering

Graphic

 
Ed Domsitz, football coach at Alter High School, leads the Knights through practice on Nov. 19. Staff photo by Ron Alvey

Load-Date: December 16, 2008


End of Document