YOUR DAILY UPDATE ON OLYMPIC NEWS;
ATLANTA GAMES 106 days;
POLL RESPONSE
The Atlanta Journal and Constitution
April 4, 1996, Thursday,
ALL EDITIONS


Copyright 1996 The Atlanta Constitution
Section: LOCAL OLYMPICS; Pg. 04B
Length: 578 words
Byline: Ron Martz; STAFF WRITER
Body

 
Downtown workers share fear of terrorism
Ken Clark is one of a growing number of downtown workers who are beginning to raise serious questions about what law enforcement officials are doing to address the issue of terrorism before and during the Olympics.
Clark, who works for the Nuclear Regulatory Commission in the 101 Building on Marietta Street near the heart of the Olympic Ring, said he and his co- workers believe the potential for a terrorist incident is high.
"I'm concerned there might be some event on a MARTA train like the release of (poison) gas on a train or some attempt to wreck a train. I'm concerned someone might try to set off an explosive device downtown here to make a statement for some twisted political reason," he said.
Concern for many
Clark was among the more than 71 percent of respondents in a Journal- Constitution poll who indicated terrorism was a concern for them. More than 34 percent of the respondents said they believe terrorism is a "major concern."
Paul Harman, executive director of BellSouth's Olympic program, said his concern over terrorism stems from Munich's 1972 Games, when 11 Israeli athletes were killed after being taken hostage by the terrorist group Black September.
 
"It happened once and it can happen again," Harman said.
Joyce Hirst, who works for Familes First on West Peachtree Street, was among the nearly 47 percent of respondents who said they believe terrorism is a minor concern.
"I think if terrorists are going to come in, it would be an Olympic venue," she said.
But the Olympic venues are likely to be so secure that terrorists may have to look outside them for targets, according to Brent Brown, president of Chesley Brown Associates of Atlanta, which assesses corporate and retail security.
"They are probably going to have some of the safest venues in the history of the Games," Brown said. "But does that mean the city is safer? Or does that mean it just pushes out the problems to non-venue locations? I believe it does."
Law enforcement officials' efforts to assure workers and corporate executives of their security downtown during the Games has been less than sterling, according to several respondents.
Although many declined to speak on the record about their concerns, several cited the low-profile approach to security taken by law enforcement agencies as doing little to deter would-be terrorists.
Federal, state and local agencies have taken the position that the less they talk about potential terrorism problems and what they are doing to prevent them, the less the Olympics-going public and downtown workers will be concerned.
But that approach does not appear to be inspiring confidence among the poll's respondents, only 37.5 percent of whom said they were "very confident" the issue of terrorism would be adequately addressed. More than 60 percent expressed some reservations, including 50 percent who said they were only "fairly confident" of efforts to protect them.
"I really feel like if somebody wants to do something, it's going to be difficult to stop them," Hirst said, "because of the number of people who will be in such a small area."
But Brown said he has seen a marked improvement in federal law enforcement officials' efforts to get a handle on possible terrorist incidents during the Games.
"Atlanta is in much better shape now than it was two years ago. If you had interviewed me then, I would have told you I would be out of town during the Olympics, I was that concerned," he said.

Graphic

 
Chart: Olympic survey
 How businesses inside the ring feel about the '96 Games
 Q: How big a concern is protection from terrorism?
 Major.......34%
 Minor.......47%
 Not.........17%
 Percentages may not total 100 because of rounding
 Source: Telephone interviews with representatives of 128 businesses
 located within the Olympic Ring. Survey conducted Feb. 12-23 by Marketing
 Workshop Inc. / Vernon Carne / staff
 Photo: As added security near the Olympic stadium, a fence taller than
 the previous one goes up on the Capitol Avenue overpass at I-20, with
 help from Felix Pacheo of Hatmaker Fence. / JOHN SPINK / Staff

Load-Date: July 17, 1996


End of Document