Your Views
The Pantagraph (Bloomington, Illinois)
August 31, 2013 Saturday


Copyright 2013 The Pantagraph
Section: OPINION; Pg. A6
Length: 617 words
Body


Unnecessary federal expenses should be cut 
The current state of federal funding to our education program has hit a new low. In our local school handbook, it recommends applying for free or reduced lunches even if we don’t think we will be approved. An explanation for this dependent mentality is based upon the explanation that applications will increase the school’s chance for additional federal funding.  
If you qualify for free lunches, most likely you would also qualify for SNAP. During the school year, SNAP does not get reduced even though the parent/guardian is no longer feeding a child at least one meal a day. SNAP recipients should supply a take-to-school lunch for their children.  
In the times of financial struggle, everyone should be more aware and involved in trimming the unnecessary expenses that occur on a daily basis. Just a little food for thought. 
David Robinson 
Bloomington 
ACA is strengthening healthcare system  
Republicans in Congress have broadly asserted that the Affordable Care Act (ACA, aka Obamacare) is a disaster. However, as Obamacare is being implemented, Republican efforts to sabotage improvements to our healthcare are failing. The ACA is slowing the rate of insurance premium increases, jobs are being created and our healthcare system is getting stronger, more efficient and covering more Americans. 
Private health insurance providers have sent rebate checks to people across Illinois because the ACA requires that companies spend at least 80 percent of premiums on healthcare, instead of allowing higher percentages of our payments to cover exorbitant CEO salaries and other unrelated expenses.  
Aaron Schock and House Republicans have repeatedly participated in 40 stunt votes-to-nowhere - bills that would have actually increased the deficit - to repeal Obamacare, votes that wasted over $50 million of taxpayer money and too much time that could have been used to pass job-creating legislation. 
As more elements of the ACA are rolled out, more Americans will have positive experiences with the law and will embrace Obamacare as they have embraced Medicare. This may be the disaster the Republicans really fear. 
Brenda Wernick– 
Bloomington 
U.S. should examine its priorities 
It is difficult to be thankful for what has not happened. Since 9/11, our government has been extremely successful in preventing terrorist attacks here in America. Nicholas Krystol writes that we have had more deaths from falling TV sets than we have had from terrorism. Yet, that remarkable "success" has occurred at a price. Recent disclosures inform us that there is continuing loss of privacy. Data gathering is pervasive and extends beyond our borders, angering even our allies. 
What should have been a limited police action, has instead become 12 years of military action - war. Including NSA intelligence gathering, this endeavor has cost more than any other American war. Americans have apparently been willing to bear the cost of waging this unwinnable "war" (or rather pass the cost on to our progeny). Despite keeping Americans safe, we have shifted terrorism to other countries, primarily Iraq and Afghanistan. 
The expenditure of these massive resources has succeeded in preventing terrorism deaths here, but we seem powerless to prevent firearms deaths here at home. On average 80 firearm deaths occur here daily. An estimated 350,000 deaths have occurred since 9/11. The power of the gun lobby has prevented the government from enacting even modestly effective measures to control firearms. 
We need a reassessment of national priorities. Consider, discuss with your family, friends and colleagues, and contact our elected officials with your views. 
John Bertsche 
Normal 

Load-Date: September 10, 2013


End of Document