Your 2 Cents
Richmond Times Dispatch (Virginia)
September 1, 2013 Sunday
State Edition


Copyright 2013 Richmond Newspapers, Inc. All Rights Reserved
Section: COMMENTARY; Pg. E-06
Length: 310 words
Body


Let me get this straight: It's ill-advised to have a Big Gulp in New York City, but it's OK to run with the bulls in Dinwiddie? You gotta love this country!
Jerry Ramsey,
Clarksville
If I had a child who took President Obama's college lecture (and he was a lecturer, not a professor) on the Constitution, I would demand my money back!
Virginia McDaniel,
Bon Air
Who says the people in Congress are not working on jobs? They are doing all they can to keep theirs while they pass laws that apply to everyone except them.
Dave Trebour,
Richmond
Anyone who dreams of moving The Diamond to Shockoe Bottom should take the Broad Street exits from I-95 during rush hour and then imagine what would happen on game nights. Turns that dream into a nightmare right quick.
Barbara Tuttle,
Chesterfield
Despite having voted 40 times to repeal so-called Obamacare, at least 20 GOP lawmakers have applied for grants made available through the law. This sounds eerily similar to the uproar over the president's stimulus package, with conservative Republicans jumping on the money train despite publicly railing against it. Simply amazing: More like, "Do as I say, not as I do."
Mark Graser,
Montpelier
Nero fiddled while Rome burned. President Obama golfs while Egypt burns.
T.C. Kramer Jr.,
Mechanicsville
Terrorism is not our enemy. Terrorism is a tactic, one largely used by criminals. The people we are facing, radical jihadists, are homicidal maniacs. They use religion as a pretext to commit murder. They're plain criminals.
Larry Herbst,
Glen Allen
Why is "fiscal conservative" Bob McDonnell excited about the surplus? Taking $2 billion more than necessary from Virginia taxpayers is not cause for celebration. It's theft. And cause for a refund.
Adam Bitely,
Alexandria
Copyright © 2013, The Richmond Times-Dispatch and may not be republished without permission. E-mail library@timesdispatch.com

Load-Date: September 4, 2013


End of Document