Your comments on my acid column; Nicholas Kristof
The New York Times 
(Nicholas Kristof)
November 29, 2008 Saturday 18:20 EST


Copyright 2008 The New York Times Company All Rights Reserved
Section: OPINION
Length: 308 words
Byline: NICHOLAS KRISTOF
Highlight: My Sunday column is about acid attacks on women in Asia. These represent a kind of brutality that never gets much attention but that certainly constitutes terrorism if you&#8217;re a woman in Pakistan, Afghanistan, India, Bangladesh or Cambodia &#8212; the main countries where the attacks occur. I had already written a draft when the Mumbai [&#8230;] 
Body


My Sunday column is about acid attacks on women in Asia. These represent a kind of brutality that never gets much attention but that certainly constitutes terrorism if you’re a woman in Pakistan, Afghanistan, India, Bangladesh or Cambodia — the main countries where the attacks occur. I had already written a draft when the Mumbai attacks occurred, but the acid underscores a different kind of terrorism that never gets attention (without of course taking anything away from the horror of what did unfold in Mumbai). And do look at the video of Naeema, it should be just to the right of this post, and also on the left side of the column itself online; video has a power to build empathy that print sometimes does not.
For those who want to help Naeema or other women like her in Pakistan, you can contact Shahnaz Bukhari of the Progressive Women’s Association of Pakistan. Her email is pwaisbd@yahoo.com Shahnaz, quite reasonably, doesn’t just want to call attention to the issue, she also is hoping that some surgeon or medical group will offer to help Naeema. Apparently, there is some medical hope that sight could be restored to one of Naeema’s eyes if she could get first-rate treatment.
Another group that works with burning victims around the world is Interplast. Interplast has doctors in Nepal and Sri Lanka and suggested that if Naeema could get to either place, they might be able to help her.
What’s appalling to me is that acid continues to be sold openly in much of the region, and that the police don’t pursue these cases. That’s why I’d like to see Congress pass the International Violence Against Women Act, bipartisan legislation backed by Senators Joe Biden and Dick Lugar. It’s not a magic bullet, but it would spotlight such violence and encourage governments in places like Pakistan to pay a bit of attention to it. 
Your comments?

Load-Date: August 23, 2017


End of Document