Zarif reacts to reported executions, crucifixion in Saudi Arabia
Stillman Advance: Stillman College
April 26, 2019 Friday


University Wire
Copyright 2019 UWIRE via U-Wire All Rights Reserved
Section: WORLD NEWS; Pg. 1
Length: 468 words
Byline: Steven Clarke
Body


Saudi Arabia crucified a man on Tuesday, but he didn't suffer on the cross: The punishment, reserved for what the kingdom sees as the most serious crimes, took place after the man had already been executed, the BBC reports.
Saudi Arabia said Tuesday it had executed 37 people convicted of terrorism-related offenses, bringing the number of executions there in the first four months of the year to 105, according to the Saudi interior ministry and Reprieve, a human rights group that tracks the use of the death penalty in the kingdom.
The majority of those executed were Shiite men who were convicted after sham trials that violated global fair trial standards and relied on confessions extracted through torture.
It marked the largest number of executions in a single day in Saudi Arabia since January 2, 2016, when the kingdom executed 47 individuals in what was the largest mass execution carried out by Saudi Arabia since 1980.
People in the executed group allegedly embraced extremist ideologies and started terrorist cells, the Interior Ministry said in a statement, according to The Associated Press.
This latest mass execution comes on the heels of Sri Lanka's Easter Day attacks that killed over 300 people, including two Saudi nationals.
"This is the largest mass execution of Shiites in the kingdom's history", he said.
Also on Monday, the kingdom announced the arrest of 13 men said to be planning attacks against the country's security services, Saudi state news agency reported.
Pats pick WR N'Keal Harry to close 1st round
Howard put on almost 100 pounds between high school and the NFL Draft , leaving Monroe County High School at 6-2, 225 pounds. He is the first receiver selected by the Patriots in the first round since they chose Terry Glenn seventh overall in 1996.
Also among them was Abdulkareem al Hawaj, who was arrested at the age of 16 in relation to his involvement in anti-government protests.
Many executions in Saudi Arabia are done by beheading in a public square.
The statement was carried across state-run media, including the Saudi news channel Al Ekhbariya.
Amnesty International called the sentences a "shocking execution spree".
The men, most of whom were Shiites, were executed inRiyadh, the Muslim holy cities of Mecca and Medina, the predominantly Sunni province of Qassim, and in the Eastern Province, home to the kingdom's Shiite minority.
The court issued death sentences for all of them, with the verdicts ratified by the court of appeals as well as the supreme court.
Saudi Arabia uses the death penalty for several offences including murder, drug-related crimes and terrorism.
Saudi security forces said on Sunday that they had foiled an attempted terror attack that targeted a domestic intelligence centre in the town of Al Zulfi, a small city about 250 kilometres north ofRiyadh.

Load-Date: April 26, 2019


End of Document