Zero Tolerance on Terror
New York Sun (Archive)
May 10, 2004 Monday


Copyright 2004 The New York Sun, Two SL, LLC All Rights Reserved
Section: EDITORIAL & OPINION; Pg. 11
Length: 1590 words
Byline: John P. Avlon
Body


It's been said that the mayor of New
York is the only local elected official in
the country expected to have his or her
own vision of foreign policy. In the past,
this was an exuberant function of leading the world's most diverse city.
Now, with our city on the front lines of the war on terror, it is an obligation. And few local modern leaders have more battle-hardened experience, or the credibility that comes from shepherding millions of people through the defining crisis of our times, than the former mayor of New York City, Rudolph Giuliani.
Late last week, Mr. Giuliani upped the ante with a foreign policy address on winning the war on terrorism in front of the Council on Foreign Relations. It was in many ways more comprehensive and compelling than anything being offered by the current presidential candidates. The speech served as a signpost in the evolution of Mr. Giuliani from a local to world leader, offering a vision that was consistent with his approach to confronting problems in New York City, applying them to the world at large. His clear vision, rooted in the lessons of recent history, was especially welcome coming during this murky moment in the war on terror.
Mr. Giuliani began with a provocative answer to those people who ask him whether the world is a more dangerous place today than in the recent past by saying, "I have exactly the opposite opinion. I believe the world is safer than it was before September 11th, 2001, and I believe it's safer in very realistic ways" - precisely because we have finally been forced to directly confront the evil of terrorism. "The basic lesson," he argued, "is that you're going to save more lives confronting horrible, horrific human beings and their movements at an early stage rather than at a later stage."
The threat of terrorism existed well before the attacks of September 11, 2001, Mr. Giuliani reminded the audience, as he traced the modern terrorist movement to the murder of the Israeli athletes by a wing of the PLO at the Munich Olympic Games in 1972.He made the case that the European response to terrorism over the past 30 years - equivocation and negotiation - actually encouraged its growth. Recalling the response to the hijacking of the Achille Lauro, which he investigated as United States Attorney because of the killing of New Yorker Leon Klinghoffer, Mr. Giuliani criticized the Italian government for releasing the terrorists as part of a deal. This sent the message, reinforced over decades, that if a group committed terrorist attacks, their leadership would not be held accountable and the immediate perpetrators would eventually be released. While Europeans wrestled with the form of liberal guilt that says victims must have directly or indirectly done something to provoke crime, the terrorists learned that their crimes would pay big time, in the form of "a ticket to the international bargaining table by pulling off dramatic, horrific terrorist attacks," Mr. Giuliani said, according to a transcript of his remarks, which is available at the council's Web site, cfr.org.
Mr. Giuliani compared the phenomenon to the almost daily problem of kidnapping in Mexico City, which his consulting company Giuliani Partners has been called in to help stop. "Kidnapping should be a much bigger problem in the United States than it is in Mexico," Mr. Giuliani argued, "We are richer, there are more people to kidnap from which you can get huge ransoms. But why is it a systemic problem in Mexico City and Mexico, but not a systemic problem in the United States? Because the United States dealt with kidnapping very early on, exactly the way we should have dealt with terrorism from the very beginning" - which is by refusing to negotiate, coordinating an overwhelming response with local and federal law enforcement working together and ensuring a disproportionate punishment for its perpetrators. In contrast to America's early zero-tolerance approach, Mexico treated kidnapping as a business negotiation, which allowed kidnappers to achieve a degree of legitimacy and in some cases avoid punishment altogether.
Those who do not learn from history are condemned to repeat it, and Mr. Giuliani pointed out as he has in the past that European attempts to appease Hitler only encouraged his aggression. Despite the fact that Hitler made his murderous ambitions known early on, there was something in civilized societies - which desired to avoid conflict in the admirable aim of peace - that caused them to withdraw from world affairs and explain away the obvious evil in front of them. Millions of people were murdered because of this state-supported form of denial. In America during the second half of the cold war, it took President Reagan to "decide that the best course for dealing with communism was to confront it, rather than to consistently negotiate and kind of be afraid of it," and as a result, millions of people were freed from living under totalitarian dictatorship.
After the Cold War, however, America briefly forgot the lessons of history and opted for cashing in on a peace dividend instead of identifying and confronting the next threat. Terrorists had already declared war on us, but we were slow to respond, frozen by the very human tendency to rationalize, romanticize, delay, and deny. But on September 11,"we had the curtain lifted from our eyes...we got to see the world the way it really is, and that alone made us safer," Mr. Giuliani explained. "Instead of playing defense, we're going to play offense as well as defense, and we're going to do everything we can to destroy" global terrorism before it destroys us.
Two and a half years after the destruction of the World Trade Center, there are some signs that public support for the war on terror is waning, especially in light of the offensive images from Abu Ghraib prison. Mr. Giuliani cautions us to keep our eye on the ball - "there's a tendency in the American personality," he says, "to kind of get halfway to our goal and then declare victory and move on to something else." That is a luxury we cannot afford.
Mr. Giuliani estimates that we are about halfway to our goal of "destabilizing and reducing the power of global terrorism. "We are safer because of the actions we have taken to arrest Al Qaeda personnel and seize its assets, but there is still more that needs to be done to permanently remove the pillars that have supported the growth of international terrorism. Specifically, Mr. Giuliani calls for the renewal of the Patriot Act to allow greater communication between government agencies, empowering America to seize more assets from terrorists, and the establishment of a decent democratic government in Iraq. "The real problem in the Middle East is that the governments of the Middle East do not do very much about the problems of their people...They're consigned to a situation where there isn't much of a way out of poverty. And they're consigned to inequality, in equality of women, lack of freedom of religion in some cases. And all of that creates an anger of mass proportions, that then is exploited, exploited and directed against Israel, exploited and directed against the United States, exploited and directed in the area of terrorism." Democracy is ultimately the solution, because only "democracies are accountable to people to solve their problems."
The speech builds seamlessly on his experience as mayor of New York. Mr. Giuliani is offering a proactive vision for the war on terror based on the same basic principles of zero tolerance used so effectively by his police department to cut crime in half. Free from the shackles of liberal guilt, smaller-scale quality of life crimes were confronted and cleaned up rather than rationalized away. By confronting a problem that many people believed was inevitable and establishing strict accountability for individual actions as well as government performance, Mr. Giuliani was able to establish order in a chaotic and reactive environment that unwittingly invited the violence it sought to avoid. In this same way, Mr. Giuliani proposes we can solve the problem of terrorism.
The speech also had credibility because it was not a policy pose bought off the rack like a new suit, but rooted in personal and well as professional experience. It was psychologically consistent with earlier stands. Freedom from fear has always been the basic philosophic principle that has guided his crusades, and life has taught him to gain energy from confronting challenges rather than giving in to the instinct many people have to shy away from conflict. "Facing reality always makes you safer than when you're not facing reality," he said in the speech, "whether it's facing health risks - I learned that from dealing with cancer - or whether it's dealing with a cancer in the national and international community, which is dealing with terrorism."
At a time when the all rhetoric surrounding the war on terror seems to be sapping its strength, Mr. Giuliani's characteristic analysis of the challenge of our time is based in a realistic understanding of history and human nature. It offered a snapshot of a leader gaining strength and incisiveness from his time of repose in the private sector. It is a voice of reason that is more vital than ever. "People who live in freedom have much more strength than people who live in oppression," Mr. Giuliani reminded us. "That's the history of the Old Testament, that's the history of the Second World War. And it's going to be the history that we create in the war on terrorism."

Load-Date: May 10, 2004


End of Document