Zimbabwean Court Upholds Terrorism Charges Against MDC Ministerial Nominee
RTT News (United States)
February 18, 2009 Wednesday


Copyright 2009 NoticiasFinancieras/Grupo de Diarios America All Rights Reserved
Length: 428 words
Body


(RTTNews) - A Zimbabwean court on Wednesday refused to dismiss terrorism charges pressed against Roy Bennett, a senior official and ministerial nominee of Zimbabwe&apos;s opposition Movement for Democratic Change (MDC), saying that there is enough evidence to proceed with the case.
Bennett, on Tuesday, was charged with the offenses of attempting to commit terrorism, banditry and sabotage, conspiring to acquire arms with a view to disrupting essential services, illegal possession of firearms and weapons and attempting to leave the country illegally.
However, the judge at the court in the town of Mutare on Wednesday cleared Bennett of violating the immigration act, but extended the custody of the MDC leader until March 4, saying that there was "reasonable suspicion" against him in a terrorism case.
"The state has succeeded in establishing reasonable suspicion that the accused committed the offense," magistrate Livingstone Chipadza ruled. "At this juncture, the state is not required to establish a prima facie case against the accused. It&apos;s required to establish reasonable suspicion."
Soon afterwards, Bennett&apos;s lawyer Trust Maanda told reporters outside the Mutare court that he would make a bail application to the Harare High Court this week itself.
Bennett, a white farmer chosen by the MDC to become the deputy minister of agriculture in the new power-sharing cabinet, was arrested at a small airport in Harare just hours before the swearing in ceremony of the new unity government on Friday. He had returned to Zimbabwe only last month from South Africa, where he fled to escape arrest over an alleged plot against President Mugabe.
His MDC party alleges that the case against Bennett is politically motivated and says that it is an attempt by hardliners in President Mugabe&apos;s Zanu-PF party to derail the coalition. They are demanding the release of Bennett, along with over 30 other MDC supporters and activists who have been arrested in recent months.
Bennett&apos;s arrest on Friday came just hours before the swearing in of a new unity cabinet formed as per an earlier power-sharing deal reached between President Mugabe&apos;s Zanu PF party and the two factions of the MDC.
It is feared that Bennett&apos;s arrest might undermine the unity government that was formed after months of negotiations, aimed at ending the political crisis in Zimbabwe and to pull back the impoverished African country from an economic collapse.
For comments and feedback: contact editorial@rttnews.com
Copyright(c) 2009 RealTimeTraders.com, Inc. All Rights Reserved

Load-Date: April 16, 2010


End of Document