Zimbabwe Power-Sharing Talks End Without Result
RTT News (United States)
October 26, 2009 Monday


Copyright 2009 NoticiasFinancieras/Grupo de Diarios America All Rights Reserved
Length: 649 words
Body


(RTTNews) - Talks between the leaders of two major parties in Zimbabwe&apos;s recently formed power-sharing government ended on Monday without reaching a deal to end the country&apos;s ongoing political crisis, said officials on Monday.
Monday&apos;s talks were aimed at resolving the country&apos;s political crisis, which came about after Prime Minister Morgan Tsvangirai pulled out of the unity government earlier this month over issues related to power-sharing and alleged human rights abuses.
The two leaders involved in the talks were Tsvangirai, the head of the MDC party, and President Robert Mugabe, who heads the Zanu PF party. The leaders were meeting for the first time after Tsvangirai temporarily withdrew from the coalition government on 16th October.
MDC spokesman Nelson Chamisa told reporters after the talks that the "three-hour principals meeting" failed to resolve the stalemate between the two parties. He indicated that the rival parties were "in disagreement on the fundamental issues."
Tsvangirai&apos;s decision to withdraw from the power-sharing government was prompted by the re-arrest of of Roy Bennett, a senior official in Tsvangirai&apos;s MDC party and a ministerial nominee in the unity government, on terrorism charges, along with several other alleged cases of harassment of MDC activists.
Tsvangirai&apos;s move came a day after a court in Harare ordered Bennett&apos;s rearrest after indicting him on terrorism charges. Bennett faces life in prison if convicted of the charges pressed against him. He was later released on bail.
Bennett&apos;s rearrest came seven months after the country&apos;s Supreme Court released him on bail from a prison in Multare in March. His rearrest earlier in the month was as per Zimbabwean law, which demands that a person indicted for trial be taken into custody until he is granted bail.
Bennett, a white farmer whose coffee farm was seized under President Robert Mugabe&apos;s land-reform program, was first arrested at a small airport in Harare on 13th February, just hours before he was to be sworn in as a deputy agricultural minister in the newly formed unity government. He has been in and out of prison since then.
Though Bennett was initially accused of involvement in alleged plot to assassinate Zimbabwean President Robert Mugabe, he was indicted by the Harare court earlier in the month on terrorism charges, including possession of arms for the purposes of banditry, terrorism and inciting acts of insurgency.
The MDC party alleges that the case against Bennett is politically motivated and says that it is an attempt by hardliners in President Mugabe&apos;s Zanu-PF party to derail the coalition. The party has warned earlier that the repeated arrests and harassment of MDC supporters are threatening the longevity and proper functioning of the six-month old coalition government.
In February, the opposition Movement for Democratic Change (MDC) and an MDC breakaway faction joined Mugabe&apos;s Zanu PF party to set up a unity government in Zimbabwe as per an earlier agreed power-sharing deal, ending months of political uncertainty in the country.
In line with the power-sharing deal, MDC leader Morgan Tsvangirai was sworn in as the country&apos;s new Prime Minister, while Mugabe remained the president. The move, aimed at ending the political crisis in Zimbabwe and to pull back the impoverished African country from economic collapse, also effectively ended almost three decades of absolute rule by President Mugabe.
The current differences between the unity government partners emerge as Zimbabwe is making desperate efforts to get aid from western nations, who are demanding a faster enforcement of political and economic reforms for providing further financial assistance to the impoverished country.
For comments and feedback: contact editorial@rttnews.com
Copyright(c) 2009 RTTNews.com, Inc. All Rights Reserved

Load-Date: April 17, 2010


End of Document