ZIMBABWE KEEPING BAN ON NEWSMEN
The New York Times
September 14, 1983, Wednesday, Late City Final Edition


Copyright 1983 The New York Times Company
Section: Section A; Page 7, Column 1; Foreign Desk
Length: 746 words
Byline: By MICHAEL T. KAUFMAN
Dateline: HARARE, Zimbabwe, Sept. 13
Body


As the Government here continues to bar entry to foreign correspondents based in South Africa, other southern African nations that supported such exclusions in principle are shying away from them in practice.
Of the six countries that issued a joint statement in July declaring their intention to ban international journalists accredited to South Africa, only Zimbabwe and Angola have adhered to the policy categorically.
And since Angola has since 1975 effectively kept out virtually all Western journalists based anywhere in Africa, the ban essentially relates to the coverage of news in this country, where events have been actively reported for years by a resident press corps as well as by correspondents based in Johannesburg and Nairobi.
Botswana, one of the signers of the so-called Kadoma Declaration, said it had not made a final decision on the issue. President Kenneth D. Kaunda of Zambia said four days ago in reference to the declaration, signed in the Zimbabwean town of Kadoma, ''Although it was a collective decision, it was described as a position, in principle, and it is up to particular countries to effect the front-line decision.''
Zimbabwe Govt continues to bar South Africa-based foreign newsmen, only one of 6 African nations to carry out ban announced in July; official Justin Nyoka suggests journalists can be 'seduced' by South African postions (S)Two Nations Disregard Ban
In fact Zambia and Mozambique, another signer, have issued visas to Johannesburg-based correspondents since the issuance of the declaration. The sixth country joining in the declaration, Tanzania, has hardly ever been visited by South African-based journalists and is usually covered by correspondents from Nairobi.
In contrast to such loose observance elsewhere, Information Ministry officials here have imposed the ban strictly on all journalists based in South Africa. They have steadfastly defended the policy in the language of the Kadoma Declaration, which contends that with South Africa used as the main information center in the region ''credibility is given to Pretoria's biased view of reality in southern Africa.''
In private conversations, information officials here have argued that South Africa has been able to co-opt journalists in South Africa subtly by effectively exempting them from taxes. ''If a newsmen spends most of his time in South Africa he can be seduced to Pretoria's point of view,'' said Justin Nyoka, deputy secretary of Zimbabwe's Department of Information.
 
Black Nations Urged as Bases
When Mr. Nyoka was asked whether the new policy would prevent Johannesburg-based reporters from having their views tempered and their consciousnesses stirred by visits to black African states, he said the ideal would be to have them establish themselves in the black-governed countries and make occasional trips to South Africa.
He cited the example of The Washington Post, which keeps a staff correspondent here in Harare while covering South Africa with a part-time, locally hired correspondent.
So far, the response of the Western press has been measured. The major news agencies, The Associated Press, United Press International, Reuters and Agence France-Presse, have all had bureaus here and all of them file their dispatches directly to their central offices. Some British papers such as The Telegraph, which covered Zimbabwe, and before that Rhodesia, through its Johannesburg bureau, have now sent reporters here from London on temporary assignments.
 
Reports of 'Terrorism' Barred
Six days after the six-nation declaration was approved, the Zimbabwean Government issued a regulation making it a criminal offense punishable by up to two years in prison for any journalist to report ''any act of terrorism or sabotage or any action by security forces to combat terrorism in any area designated by the Government.''
The Government decree was issued under the 18-year-old Emergency Powers Act that was invoked in the last years of the Rhodesian Government of Ian D. Smith to require journalists to submit their dispatches to censors before sending them abroad.
In the 14 years that Rhodesia existed as an internationally outlawed nation, its Department of Information carefully culled news accounts and maintained a list of journalists to be barred at the airport because of reports the authorities considered offensive. There were at least 27 such journalists. In addition, there were scores more who had been notified by telephone that they would not be welcome.


End of Document