Zimbabwe Court Orders Release Of Ministerial Nominee
RTT News (United States)
October 16, 2009 Friday


Copyright 2009 NoticiasFinancieras/Grupo de Diarios America All Rights Reserved
Length: 303 words
Body


(RTTNews) - The High Court of Zimbabwe ordered Friday the release on bail of Movement for Democratic Change (MDC) ministerial nominee Roy Bennett, two days after he was imprisoned on charges of terrorism.
His arrest prompted Prime Minister Morgan Tsvangirai, who is also the leader of MDC, to announce earlier in the day that his party would boycott the country&apos;s unity government.
Bennett, a white farmer whose coffee farm was seized under Mugabe&apos;s land-reform program, was arrested in February, just hours before the swearing-in of the new unity government.
He was freed the next month on stringent bail conditions. A senior party official and a nominee in the unity government, he was again detained Wednesday after being indicted on weapons and terrorism charges, for which he faces life in prison if convicted.
The judge, Justice Charles Hungwe, said Bennett stood to lose more by absconding and is entitled for bail.
Bloomberg quoted Kumbirai Mafunda, a spokesman for Zimbabwe Lawyers for Human Rights, as saying that Bennett will appear in the High Court Monday to face the terror charges.
MDC alleges that the case against Bennett is politically- motivated and an attempt by hardliners in President Robert Mugabe&apos;s Zanu-PF party to derail the coalition government, which was formed in February after months of internationally-mediated negotiations between the two rival parties to end the political crisis in Zimbabwe.
At a press conference in Harare, Tsvangirai said he was not pulling out officially from the coalition cabinet, but vowed that the boycott would last until the "full resolution of all outstanding issues and the substantial implementation of the Global Political Agreement."
For comments and feedback: contact editorial@rttnews.com
Copyright(c) 2009 RTTNews.com, Inc. All Rights Reserved

Load-Date: April 17, 2010


End of Document