ZULUS' BUTHELEZI, WHITE LEADER TALK PEACE
St. Louis Post-Dispatch (Missouri)
November 3, 1990, SATURDAY, FIVE STAR Edition


Copyright 1990 St. Louis Post-Dispatch, Inc.
Section: NEWS; Pg. 1A
Length: 327 words
Body


DURBAN, South Africa - Mangosuthu Buthelezi, head of South Africa's largest Zulu tribe, talked Friday with the leader of pro-apartheid whites for the first time - and both promised to oppose terrorism and communism.  ''Both of us have a Christian view of life, and both reject domination, terrorism and communism,'' said a joint statement issued by Andries Treurnicht, leader of the Conservative Party, and Buthelezi, chief minister of the KwaZulu tribal homeland.  The statement was widely seen as criticism of Nelson Mandela's African National Congress, the main black opposition group. The African National Congress had waged a guerrilla war against South Africa's apartheid policy of racial segregation.  The left-wing African National Congress abandoned its war earlier this year and is now holding talks with President F.W. de Klerk's government to try to work out a post-apartheid constitution.  Both the Inkatha Freedom Party and the Conservative Party have been excluded from the talks.  (NOTE: THE FOLLOWING TEXT APPEARED IN THE 3* EDITION ONLY) HEADLINE: Police briefly detained a member of parliament on Friday after he refused orders to leave a township that had been declared an unrest area. Officers used tear gas to disperse onlookers.  The lawmaker, Jan van Eck of the liberal opposition Democratic Party, was released after a few hours. Police escorted him out of Khayelitsha, one of three black townships placed under strict security measures Thursday.  In the township, van Eck visited the home of an anti-apartheid leader.  Police Maj. Gen. P.C. Fourie said van Eck had been told to leave when he began addressing a crowd.
But he refused to do so and was taken away in a police van.  A crowd of about 100 people began rioting during van Eck's arrest, and police used tear gas to restore order, Fourie said. No injuries were reported.  Police said 11 people had been injured when Zulu and Xhosa miners clashed at a mine in the province of Natal.

Load-Date: October 18, 1993


End of Document